---
title: K / Signal Description / Address And Related Control Signals
manual: hardware
chapter: hardware
section: k-signal-description-address-and-related-control-signals
functions: []
libraries: []
---

# K / Signal Description / Address And Related Control Signals

> *Source: Amiga Developer CD v2.1. (C) Commodore-Amiga / Amiga Inc.*

These signals are various items used for the addressing of devices in
Zorro III mode by bus masters either on the bus or from the local bus.
The bus controller translates local bus signals (68030 protocol on the
A3000) into Zorro III signals; masters are responsible for creating the
appropriate signals via their own bus control logic.

Read Enable (READ)
   Read enable for the bus; READ is asserted by the bus master during a
   bus cycle to indicate a read cycle, READ is negated to indicate a
   write cycle. READ is asserted at address time, prior to /FCS, for a
   full cycle, and prior to  [/MTCR](hardware/k-signal-description-data-and-related-control-signals.md)  for a short cycle.  READ stays valid
   throughout the cycle; no latching required.

Multiplexed Address Bus (A8-A31)
   These signals are driven by the bus master during address time, prior
   to the assertion of /FCS.  Any responding slave must latch as many of
   these lines as it needs on the falling edge of /FCS, as they're
   tri-stated very shortly after /FCS goes low.  These addresses always
   include all configuration address bits for normal cycles, and the
   cycle type information for  [Quick Interrupt cycles](hardware/k-timing-quick-interrupt-cycle-timing.md) .

Short Address Bus (A2-A7)
   These signals are driven by the bus master during address time, prior
   to the assertion of /FCS, for full cycles, and prior to the assertion
   of  [/MTCR](hardware/k-signal-description-data-and-related-control-signals.md)  for short cycles.  They stay valid for the entire full or
   short cycle, and as such do not need to be latched by responding
   slaves.

Memory Space (FC0-FC2)
   The memory space bits are an extension to the bus address, indicating
   which type of access is taking place. Zorro III PICs must pay close
   attention to valid memory space types, as the space type can change
   the type of the cycle driven by the current bus master.  The encoding
   is the same as the valid Motorola function codes for normal accesses.
   These are driven at address time, and like the low short address, are
   valid for an entire short or full cycle.




      FC0 FC1  FC2  Address   Space Type                 Z3 Response
      -------  ---  -------   ----------                 -----------
         0      0      0      Reserved                   None
         0      0      1      User Data Spce             Memory
         0      1      0      User Program Space         Memory
         0      1      1      Reserved                   None
         1      0      0      Reserved                   None
         1      0      1      Supervisor Data Space      Memory
         1      1      0      Superviser Program Space   Memory
         1      1      1      CPU Space                  Interrupts


                Table K-1: Memory Space Type Codes
Compatibility Cycle Strobe (/CCS)
   This is equivalent to the Zorro II address strobe,  [/AS](hardware/k-signal-description-addressing-and-control-signals.md) .  A Zorro III
   PIC doesn't use this for normal operation, but may use it during the
```c
    [autoconfiguration](hardware/k-autoconfig-tm-the-autoconfig-mechanism.md)  process if configuring at the Zorro II address.
    [AUTOCONFIG](hardware/k-autoconfig-tm-the-autoconfig-mechanism.md)  cycles at $00E8xxxx always look like Zorro II cycles,
```
   though /FCS and the full Zorro III address is available, so a card
   can use either Zorro II or Zorro III addressing to start the cycle.
   However, using the /CCS strobe can save the designer the need to
   compare the upper 8 bits of the address.  Data must be driven Zorro
   II style, though if the  [/DSn](hardware/k-signal-description-data-and-related-control-signals.md)  lines are respected for reads,  [/CINH](hardware/k-signal-description-data-and-related-control-signals.md)  is
   asserted, and  [/MTACK](hardware/k-signal-description-data-and-related-control-signals.md)  is negated, the resulting Zorro III cycle will
   fit within the expected Zorro II cycle generated by the bus
   controller.  Yes, that should sound weird; it's based on the mapping
   of Zorro II vs. Zorro III signals, and of course the fact that /FCS
   always starts any cycle. Also note that a bus cycle with /CCS
   asserted and /FCS negated is always a Zorro II PIC-as-master cycle.
   Many Zorro III cards will instead configure at the alternate
   $FF00xxxx base address, fully in Zorro III mode, and thus completely
   ignore this signal.

Full Cycle Strobe (/FCS)
   This is the standard Zorro III full cycle strobe.  This is asserted
   by the bus master shortly after addresses are valid on the bus, and
   signals the start of any kind of Zorro III bus cycle.  Shortly after
   this line is asserted, all the multiplexed addresses will go invalid,
   so in general, all slaves latch the bus address on the falling edge
   of /FCS.  Also,  [/BGn](hardware/k-signal-description-dma-control-signals-2.md)  line is negated for a Zorro III mastered cycle
   shortly after /FCS is asserted by the master.

