---
title: card.resource/CardProgramVoltage
manual: autodocs-3.5
chapter: autodocs-3.5
section: card-resource-cardprogramvoltage
functions: []
libraries: []
---

# card.resource/CardProgramVoltage

> *Source: Amiga Developer CD v2.1. (C) Commodore-Amiga / Amiga Inc.*

   NAME
	CardProgramVoltage -- Set programming voltage.

   SYNOPSIS
	success=CardProgramVoltage( handle, voltage );
					a1      d0

	[LONG](autodocs-3.5/include-exec-types-h.md) CardProgramVoltage( struct [CardHandle](autodocs-3.5/include-resources-card-h.md) *, ULONG );

   FUNCTION
	Used to set programming voltages (e.g., for FLASH-ROM/EPROM
	cards).

   INPUTS
	handle - Same handle as that used when [OwnCard()](autodocs-3.5/card-resource-owncard.md) was called.

	voltage - See card.i/h for valid values.

   RETURNS
	1  - Successful.

	0  - Not successful.  Most likely because the credit-card
	card has been removed, and you are no longer the owner.

	-1 - This function is not being supported.  On some machines
	with a minimal (hardware) credit-card interface, this feature
	may not be possible.

   NOTES
	This function may be called from within a task, or from a level 1
	or level 2 interrupt.


       !!!WARNING!!!
	Flash-ROM programming requires careful coding to prevent
	leaving the Erase command on too long.  Failure to observe
	the maximum time between the Erase command, and the Erase-Verify
	command can make a Flash-ROM card unusable.  Some Flash-ROM cards
	may provide an internal watch-dog timer which protects the card.

	Because of the relatively long time (e.g., 10ms) between Erase, and
	Erase-Verify which must be observed, the need for such critical
	timing can be problematic on a multi-tasking machine.

	Vendors of Flash-ROM's recommend a high priority interrupt
	generated by a 10ms timer be used to turn off Erase.  On the
	Amiga this can be accomplished by using a CIA-B interval timer.
	The timer.device also provides a mechanism for generating a low
	priority interrupt.  The timer.device is easier to use than [CIA](autodocs-3.5/include-hardware-cia-h.md)
	interval timers, though not as accurate or as safe.

	Even if the Flash-ROM card provides an internal watch-dog timer,
	implementation of the code during Erase should assume that
	the Flash-ROM does not.

   SEE ALSO
	[OwnCard()](autodocs-3.5/card-resource-owncard.md), [resources/card.h](autodocs-3.5/include-resources-card-h.md), resources/card.i

