# The Serial Interfaces

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

### 11.7.11 The Serial Interfaces

As we discussed earlier, the Amiga has a  standard RS-232 interface. The various lines of this connector can be divided into two signal groups:

1. The serial data lines 

2. The handshake lines 

First about number 2: The RS-232 interface has a  number of handshake 

lines. Normally they are not all used. However, the behavior of these signals is not always the same from one RS-232 device to another. Now to number 1: All data transfer takes place over the two data lines. The RXD line receives the data and it's sent out over TXD. RS-232 communication can take place in two directions at once when two devices are connected together through RXD and TXD. The RXD of one device is connected to the TXD of the other, and vice versa.

Principle of serial RS-232 data transfer 

Principle 

of serial RS-232 data transfer ov

1 i 

0 0 

r

1 u 

» 

t
J 

-1£V ™\_ 

Start 

bit

Data 

bits

Earliest possible 

time for start nf

Stop 

bit next character The RS-232 data transfer Since only one line is available for the data transfer in each direction, the data words must be converted into a  serial data stream which can then be transmitted bit by bit. No clock lines are provided in the RS-232 standard. So that the receiver knows when it can read the next bit, the time per bit must be constant (i.e., the speed at which the data is sent and received must be defined). This speed is called the baud rate, and it determines the number of bits transferred per second. For example, common baud rates are 300, 1200, 2400, 4800 and 9600 baud. You're not limited to these baud rates, but when using strange baud rates, remember that the sender and receiver must actually match.

One more thing required for successful transfer is that the receiver must 

know when a  byte starts and ends. The above figure shows the timing of the transmission of a  data byte on one of the data lines. Each byte begins with a  start bit, which is no different from the normal data bits but always has a  value of 0. Following this are the data bits in the order LSB to
MSB. At the end are one or two stop bits, which have the value 1. The 

receiver recognizes the transition from one byte to the next by the level change from 1  to 0  that occurs when a  start bit follows a  stop bit. The component that performs this serial transfer is called a  Universal
Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter, or UART. In the Amiga it is 

contained in Paula, and its registers are in the custom chip register area: The UART registers

SERPER $032 (write-only) 

Bit no. Name 

Function 

0-14 

LONG 

RATE 

Set length of receive data to 9  bits 

This 15-bit number contains the baud rate

SERDAT $030 (write-only) 

SERDAT contains the send data. 

SERDATR $018 (read-only) 

Bit no. 

Name 

Function 

OVRUN 

Overrun of receive shift register 

RBF 

Receive buffer full 

TBE 

Transmit buffer empty 

TSRE 

Transmit shift register empty 

RXD 

Corresponds to level on RXD line 

... 

Unused 

STP 

Stop bit 

STP or DB8 

Depends on data length 

DB7 

Receive data buffer bit 7 

DB6 

Receive data buffer bit 6 

DB5 

Receive data buffer bit 5 

DB4 

Receive data buffer bit 4 

DB3 

Receive data buffer bit 3 

DB2 

Receive data buffer bit 2 

DB1 

Receive data buffer bit 1 

DBO 

Receive data buffer bit 0 

One bit in the ADKCON register belongs to UART control: 

ADKCON $09E (write) ADKCONR $010 (read) SERIELL 

Bit no. 1 1: UARTBRK -  interrupts the serial output and sets TXD 

to 0.

Data transfer with the Amiga UART 

Receiving 

The reception of the serial data takes place in two stages. The bits arriving on the RXD pin are received into the shift register at the baud rate and are combined there into a  parallel data word. When the shift register is full, its contents are written into the receiver data buffer. It is then free for the next data. The processor can read only the receiver data buffer, not the shift register. The corresponding data bits in the
SERDATR register are DBO to DB7 or DB8. 

The Amiga can receive both eight and nine-bit data words. The UART can be set to 9-bit words with the LONG bit (=1) in the SERPER register. The data length determines the format in the SERDATR register. With 9 bits, bit 8  of SERDATR contains the ninth data bit, while the stop bit is found in bit 9. With eight data bits, bit 8  contains the stop bit. If two stop bits are present, the second lands in bit 9. The state of the receiver shift register and the data buffer is given by two signal bits in SERDATR:

RBF stands for Receive Buffer Full. As soon as a  data word is transferred 

from the shift register to the buffer, this bit changes to 1  and thereby signals the processor that it should read the data out of SERDATR. This bit also exists in the interrupt registers (RBF, INTREQ/INTEN bit 11). After the processor has read the data, it must reset RBF in INTREQ. The bit then returns to 0  in SERDATR and in INTREQR.

MOVE.W #$0800,$DFFOOO+INTREQ ,-Clears RBF in INTREQ and SERDATR 

If this is not done and the shift register has received another complete data word, the UART sets the OVRUN bit. This signals that no more data can be received because both the buffer (RBF =1) and the shift register
(OVRUN =  1) are full. OVRUN returns to 0  when RBF is reset. RBF then 

jumps back to 1  because the contents of the shift register are immediately transferred to DBO through DB8 to free the shift register for more data.

Transmitting 

The sending process also takes place in two stages. The transmit data buffer is found in the SERDAT register. As soon as a  data word is written into this register it is transferred to the output shift register. This is signaled by the TBE bit. TBE stands for Transmit Buffer Empty and indicates that SERDAT is ready to take more data. TBE is also present in the interrupt registers (TBE, INTREQ/INTEN bit 0). Like RBF, TBF must also be reset in the INTREQ register.

Once the shift register has sent the data word, the next one is 

automatically loaded from the transmitter data buffer. If this is empty, the
UART sets the TSRE bit (Transmit Shift Register Empty) to 1. This bit is 

reset when TBE is cleared. The length of the data word and the number of stop bits are set by the format of the data in SERDAT. You simply write the desired data word to the lower eight or nine bits of SERDAT with one or two stop bits (l's) in front of it. An eight-bit data word with two stop bits would look like this, for example:

1 §       5 4       3 2       1 0~~ 

D7 D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 D1 DO 

Bit no.: 15 14 13 12 11 9       8 

Function: 0       0 0       0 0       1 1 

DO to D7 are the eight data bits. 

The two ones represent the desired two stop bits. With a  nine-bit data word and one stop bit the following data must be written into SERDAT:

Bit no.: 

Function: 

13 12 11 9        8 7 

0 0        0 1        D8 D7 

D6 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

Eight bits plus one stop bit: 

Bit no.: 

Function: 

13 12 11 9        8 7 

0 0        0 0        1 D7 

D6 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

The LONG bit in the SERPER register affects only the length of the data received. The format of the transmitted data is determined only by the value in the SERDAT register.

Setting the baud rate 

The baud rate for sending and receiving data must be written to the lower 15 bits of the SERPER register. Unfortunately, the baud rate cannot be set directly. You must select the number of bus cycles between two bits (1 bus cycle takes 2.79365 *  10-7 seconds). If a  bit is to be output every n  bus cycles, the value n-1 must be written to the
SERPER register. The following formula can be used to calculate the 

necessary SERPER value from the baud rate:

SERPER =  - 1 

Baud rate* 2.79365* 10-7 

For example, for a  baud rate of 4800 baud:
ISERPER =  1/(4800*2.79365*10-7)-!= 1/0.00134-1= 744.74 

The calculated value is rounded and written to SERPER:

MOVE.W #745,$DFF000+SERPER Set SERPER, LONG =  0 

or

MOVE.W #$8000+745, $DFFO0O+SERPER ,-LONG =  1 

1 1 .7.1 2 The Disk Controller 

The hardware control of the disk drives is divided into two parts. First there are the control lines which activate the desired drive, turn the motor on, move the read/write head, etc. They all lead to various port lines of the CIAs.

Excluded from these are the data lines. These carry the data from the 

read/write head to the Amiga and, when writing, in the opposite direction from the Amiga to the diskette. A  special component in Paula, the disk controller, handles the processing of the data. It has its own DMA channel and writes or reads data by itself to or from the disk.

Programming the disk DMA 

Before you start the disk DMA you must be sure that the previous disk
DMA is finished. If one interrupts a  write access in piogress, the data on 

the corresponding track can be destroyed. Let's assume that the last disk
DMA is done. 

First we must define the memory address of the data buffer. The disk 

DMA uses one of the usual address register pairs as a  pointer to the chip 

RAM. The registers are called DSKPTH and DKSPTL: 

$20 DSKPTH Pointer to data from/to disk Bits 16-20 

$22 DSKPTL Pointer to data from/to disk Bits 0-15. 

Next the DSKLEN register must be initialized. It is constructed as 

follows:

DSKLEN $024 (write-only) 

Bit no. 

Name 

Function 

0-13 

DMAEN 

WRITE 

LENGTH 

Enable disk DMA 

Write data to disk 

Number of data words to be transferred 

LENGTH The lower 14 bits of the DSKLEN register contain the 

number of data words to be transferred.

WRITE WRITE =  1 switches the disk controller from read to 

write.

DMAEN When DMAEN is set to 1  the data transfer begins. 

A few things must be noted:

1. The Disk DMA Enable bit in the DMACON register (DSKEN, bit 4) 

must also be set.

2. To make it more difficult to write to the disk accidentally, the 

DMAEN bit must be set twice in succession. Only then does the 

disk DMA begin. Furthermore, for safety's sake the WRITE bit should only be 1  during a  write operation. An orderly initialization sequence for disk DMA appears as follows:

1. Write a  0 to DSKLEN to turn DMAEN off. 

2. If DSKEN in DMACON is not yet set, do so now. 

3 . Store the desired address in DSKPTH and DSKPTL. 

4. Write the correct value for LENGTH and WRITE along with a  set 

DMAEN bit to DSKLEN. 

5 . Write the same value into DSKLEN again. 

6. Wait until the disk DMA is done. 

7. For safety's sake, set DSKLEN back to zero. 

//. The A3000 Hardware 

The DSKBLK interrupt (disk block finished, bit 1  in INTREQ/INTEN) is provided so that the processor knows when the disk controller has transferred the number of words defined in LENGTH. It is generated when the last data word is read or written. The current status of the disk controller can be read in the DSKBYTR register:

DSKBYTR $01 A (read-only) 

Bit no. 

Name 

Function 

BYTEREADY 

Signals that the data byte in the lower eight bits 

is valid.

DMAON 

Indicates whether the disk DMA is enabled. To 

make DMAON =  1 , both DMAEN in DSKLEN and DSKEN in DMACON must also be set.

DSKWRITE 

Indicates the status of WRITE in DSKLEN. 

WORDEQUAL 

Disk data equals DSKSYNC 

11-8 

Unused 

7-0 

DATA 

Current data byte from the disk 

With the eight DATA bits and the BYTEREADY flag you can read the data from the disk with the processor rather than through DMA. Each time a  complete byte is received the disk controller sets the
BYTEREADY bit. The processor then knows that the data byte in the 

eight DATA bits is valid. After the DSKBYTER register is read the
BYTEREADY flag is automatically reset. 

Sometimes we don't want to read an entire track into memory at once. In 

this case the DMA transfer can be made to start at a  given position. To do this, write the data word at which you want the disk controller to start into the DSKSYNC register:

DSKSYNC $07E (write-only) 

DSKSYNC contains the data word at which the transfer is to begin. The 

disk controller then starts as usual after the disk DMA is enabled and reads the data from the disk, but it doesn't write it into memory. Instead, it continually compares each data word with the word in DSKSYNC. When the two match it starts the data transfer, which then continues as usual. The disk controller can be programmed to wait for the synchronization mark at the start of a  data block. The WORDEQUAL bit in the DSKBYTER register becomes 1  as soon as the data read matches DSKSYNC. Since this match only lasts two (or
