# The 68030

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

Because of the advances in semiconductor technology, more function 

blocks can be included on a  single chip. The MMU, which was a coprocessor for the 68020, is now integrated into the 68030.
Furthermore, the 256-byte instruction cache is accompanied in the 

68030 by a  data cache of the same size. 

The bus controller, which manages communication between memory and the CPU, is also improved. It can now move data into the cache independent of the processor and, with sufficiently fast RAM, transfer data over the bus at a  rate almost double that of the 68020 running at the same clock frequency. This concept of parallel processing is actually what distinguishes the
68030 from its predecessor. Because of the separation of the address and 

data buses between the caches and the processing unit (Harvard
Architecture), instructions can be processed partially in parallel. While 

the last operation's data is still being processed, the next instruction is decoded and prepared. The bus controller loads the data from RAM and the MMU translates and validates the addresses. The following sections describe the various function blocks and their programming. However, since the subject of this book is the Amiga instead of the 68030, we won't provide detailed information. We will discuss primarily the differences and improvements that distinguish the
68030 from the 68000. 

If you're not familiar with machine language, refer to one of the many books on programming the 68000. This should help you understand the instructions and addressing types that are new to the 68030. o

<= 

=® " 8=T7 

1L 

77h? Architecture of the 68030 

The Program Model

LU 

Q 

O 

DC 

LU 

</) 

Wgmm 

-^•^EW^iSSJisT.! 

igBsasaagncBKgjpM

HBBKBJ 

* '      (V 

i» •■. ■.Ut^j*#SSI lituLi

.... . 

S^a^tjBHBB 

?*3=?6g^^>B|i!JiMla 

UVW& 

' '■.-> .<■:■■■■ ■      .'■.i^Si- 

':■ .  'S Sijt&S 

mmu.

•"'■■'•••t.Tr'f

^fi<^| 

■ "  ■ .. 

31 0 

mm

IHfc££« 

• 

. | 

1 PC 

DATA 

' REGISTERS 

ADDRESS 

REGISTERS 

USER STACK 

"POINTER 

~| PROGRAM 

h COUNTER

J§ 2 , , 9 ~1_ CONDITION 

I p I I  CCR J" CODE REGISTER 

-™~_J,_ 

- 

^ A7' (ISP) 

ft|A7-

MASTER 

(MSP) h  STACK POINTER 

A2- 

'&&8M .-'.■ i<xm |sr 

__] VBR 

2 0 

31 0 

kiaSfk-' ____^_ . I CACR

31 0 

l-aatttw- "" .>->:. ,'r j! caar

■&m&,- '  v~7~" -   . "  " ~~l ™ 

I ..:^,,-....-..A^.,.. .-.,.■ ..:::.... *..,»,\Tty 

IS 0 

I ~  ~1 MMUSR 

INTERRUPT 

STACK POINTER 

STATUS 

REGISTER 

VECTOR BASE 

REGISTER 

ALTERNATE 

FUNCTION 

CODE REGISTERS 

CACHE CONTROL 

REGISTER 

CACHE ADDRESS 

' REGISTER 

CPU ROOT 

.POINTER 

REGISTER 

SUPERVISOR 

.ROOT POINTER 

REGISTER 

TRANSLATION 

CONTROL REGISTER 

TRANSPARENT 

TRANSLATION 

REGISTER 0 

TRANSPARENT 

•TRANSLATION 

REGISTER 1 

.MMU STATUS 

REGISTER 

Program Model 

The illustration shows all the registers of the 68030. Those under the heading 'User Mode Program Model' are identical to those of the 68000: eight each of the universal data and address registers (A7 is the stack pointer), the Program Counter and the Condition Code Register. These are the only registers that can be referenced in user mode.

Some new registers have been added for supervisor mode. The 68000 

had two stack pointers, the User Stack Pointer (USP, A7) and the
Supervisor Stack Pointer (SSP, A7'). In the 68030 the latter has been 

further divided into an Interrupt Stack Pointer (ISP, A7') and a  Master
Stack Pointer (MSP, A"). 

The following registers are new in the 68030:

VBR 

SFC 

DFC 

Vector Base Register: With this register the base address 

of the Exception Vector Table can be set to any desired value (in the 68000 this was always 0).

Alternate Function Code Registers 

SFC and DFC stand for Source and Destination Func- 

tion Code, respectively. These registers permit explicit selection of the address region to be accessed by a
MOVE instruction. 

CACR 

CAAR 

Five address regions are distinguished: User Program, 

Supervisor Program, User Data, Supervisor Data and 

Processor (the Processor address region is used for 

communication with the coprocessor and hardware, for example in fetching interrupt vectors, etc.).

Data can be easily copied between the various address 

regions by means of MOVE instructions using the
Alternate Function Code Registers. 

Cache Control Register 

Cache Address Register 

The previous two registers control the functioning of the integrated data and address caches.

CRP 

SRP 

TC 

TTO 

Til 

MMUSR 

SR 

CPU Root Pointer 

Supervisor Root Pointer 

Translation Control Register 

Transparent Translation Register 0 

Transparent Translation Register 1 

MMU Status Register 

The previous six registers belong to the MMU.

Status Register 

USER BYTE 

SYSTEM BYTE (CONDITION CODE 

REGISTER) 

15 14 13 12 11 10 9     87654321 0 

T1 

TRACE 

ENABLE 

SUPERVISOR/USER 

STATE 

MASTER/INTERRUPT 

STATE 

TO 

M 

0 0 

INTERRUPT 

PRIORITY MASK 

CARRY 

OVERFLOW 

ZERO 

NEGATIVE 

EXTEND 

The Status Register The lower byte of this register contains the condition code and is therefore referred to as the Condition Code Register (CCR). The CCR can be referenced in user as well as supervisor mode. The upper half of the Status Register, the System Byte, contains important system flags:

Interrupt Priority Mask 

Like the 68000, the 68030 distinguishes even interrupt levels by priority, 

from a  lowest priority of 1  to a  highest of 7. By means of the three bits in the Interrupt Priority Mask, all interrupts up to and including a  certain priority can be disabled. Only interrupts of priority higher than the number in the mask will be executed. Level 7  is an exception. An interrupt of this priority is referred to as a  Non-
Maskable-Interrupt (NMI) and cannot be disabled. 

Trace Enable 

These two bits control the processor's trace mode (see Exceptions).

Supervisor Bit 

When this bit is set, the 68030 is in supervisor as opposed to user mode. From within user mode this bit can be set only by an exception, since direct access to the Status Register's System Byte is not permitted in user mode.

Master Bit 

The Master Bit distinguishes between the two supervisor stack pointers. If this bit is NULL, the CPU uses the Interrupt Stack Pointer. If it is set, the CPU uses the Master Stack Pointer for all operations, provided that the Supervisor Bit is also set, and switches to the ISP only with an interrupt.

CCR 

The Condition Code Byte is the lower half of the Status
Register. It contains the following five flag bits: 

Carry 

Overflow 

Zero 

Negative 

Extend 

Carry from the MSB (most significant, or last, bit) 

Carry from the next to last bit 

Result equals zero 

Result is negative (MSB =  1) 

Like Carry, but only set in arithmetic operations 

Every instruction that alters data sets these flags according to the result. These bits can be used as decision criteria for instructions that control program flow, as in the Bcc (Branch on condition code) instruction.

Bit (0<Modulo (Offset)<31, Offset of 0=MSB) 

31 30 29 

Byte 

24 23 16 15 8 7 

mum*!--'

16-Bit Word 

High-Order V 

16 15 

~fc:SH 

1 0 

MM 

Long Word 

l<tftiMBttlhtf -            =•.-• ■•• I

Quad Word 

63 62 

ma -

: 

^^4^^l 

1 0 

I ,. -•-,.-. 

' 

\m 

Bit Field (0<Offset<32,0<Width£32) 

31 I  Width 

i MSB ... LSB i

Unpacked BCB (a=MSB) 

Packed BCB (a= MSB First Digit, e= MSB Second Digit) 

31 8 76 5       4 3       2 1 

lliil b

Data Types 

The fundamental data type of the 680xx is the integer number. It can have a  size of 8  bits (one byte), 16 bits (one word) or 32 bits (one long word). When placed in a  data register (32 bits), an 8- or 16-bit operand is loaded into the lower half or quarter of the register.

Address registers can contain only word or longword data types. A  16- 

bit value written to an address register is expanded to 32 bits based on

Unlike the 68000, the 68030 can reference all data types on byte 

addresses. It is no longer necessary to align a  word or longword operand to an address that corresponds to a  multiple of its size. Nevertheless, it is always faster to align data fields by the number of bytes they occupy. In a hardware sense, the 68030 always reads one long word at a  time (a transfer of 32 bits per bus cycle over the 32-bit data bus). The data bus is aligned, however, according to longword addresses. Two bus cycles are thus required to read a  long word that begins on an odd word address
(an address that is not a  multiple of four). 

Aligned: 

ByteO Bytel Byte2 Byte3 Byte4 Byte5 Bvte6 Bvte7 

WordO 

Word2 

LongwordO 

WorcW 

Word6 

Longword4 

__ 

Misaligned: 

ByteO Bytel Byte2 Byte3 Byte4 Byte5 Byte6 Bvte7 

- 

Wordl 

Word3 

Longwordl 

~~ 

WordS- 

Word? 

Longword5 

.. 

Therefore, although it is possible to work with misaligned data on the
68030, a  trade-off in terms of reduced speed will likely result. 

In addition to the integral data type there is also the bit. A  bit can be read, set or cleared. An individual bit is referenced either by its byte address and bit number (0 through 7) or, when it is in a  register rather than in memory, by the register name and bit number (here 0  through 31). The least significant bit is numbered 0. As an extension of the bit data type, the bit field was introduced with the
68030. The bit field is a  sequence of up to 32 bits, that don't have to 

begin on a  byte boundary. Besides a  memory address or register name, an offset is required to reference such a  field. It indicates the beginning of the bit field relative to the most significant bit of the address or register. The offset is a  signed quantity, meaning that the field can also begin before the base address. The size of the bit field can be from one to 32 bits. Within the field, bits are numbered in the opposite direction from that of integral numbers. Bit number 0, whose position is determined by the offset, is the most significant bit of the field. A new integer data type called the quad word has been added. This is simply a  double long word (64 bits). Since registers are 32 bits, two of them are required for a  quad word. The quad word is used only in multiplication and division. It cannot be simply used in place of the other integer types. By means of the MOVEM instruction, however, it is possible to move a  quad word between registers and memory. (Naturally, this is done in two normal MOVE! instructions.)

One last data type exists, the binary coded decimal (BCD) numbers. A 

BCD number is stored in the base-ten system, using only values between 

0 and 9. The 68030 distinguishes between packed and unpacked BCD 

values. In unpacked format, one byte contains one digit the upper four bits are always null. In packed format, both half-bytes (nibbles) are used.

Types of Addressing 

Addressing capabilities are greatly expanded in the 68030 as compared 

to the 68000, although the traditional types of addressing are still the most frequently used.

Register Direct 

The desired operand is the register itself.

Syntax: Rn 

(Rn is any address or data register number) 

Absolute: The operand address is given immediately after the 

instruction.

Syntax: Address.W or Address! 

Immediate: 

(With the Address.W (Address.Word) format, the address is 

expanded to 32 bits based on the sign of the 16-bit word value, thus referencing only the first or last 32K of memory.) The byte, word or long word following the instruction is the operand.

Syntax: #Operand 

Address Register Indirect: 

The value in the given register contains the address of the operand in memory.

Syntax: (An) 

(An is any address register number) 

Address Register Indirect with Postincrement or Predecrement: 

In postincrement addressing, the address of the operand in the corresponding register is incremented by the size of the operand in bytes. This takes place AFTER the operand has been processed. In predecrement addressing, the address is decremented by the size of the operand BEFORE the instruction is executed. Thus the address is incremented or decremented by one for byte, two for word and four for longword operands. (When this type of addressing is used for coprocessor data types, this value depends on their size.)

Syntax: (An)+ (Postincrement) 

-(An) (Predecrement) 

Address Register Indirect with Displacement: 

A value specified with the instruction (the displacement) is added to the memory address from the address register. The result is the operand address in memory. Since the displacement is a  signed 16-bit number, this addressing method spans an area of 32K before and after the address contained in the register.

Syntax: (di6,An) 

(dig -  16-bit displacement) 

Address Register Indirect with Index and 8-bit Displacement: 

This method is slightly more complicated. First the displacement is added to the value in the address register. Then the CPU multiplies the index, which may be in any address or data register, by a  factor of 1, 2, 4  or 8, and finally adds the two results.

Value from Address Register 

Displacement 

Value from Index Register (.W,.L) *  1 , 2, 4 or 8 

Address of Operand 

Syntax: (ds,An,Rn.SIZE *  SCALE) 

(Rn.SIZE *  SCALE -  any register number with SIZE of 16 

or 32 bits, multiplied by SCALE value of 1,2,4 or 8.)

Address Register Indirect with Index and Base Displacement: 

This method of addressing closely resembles the previous one, except that the displacement may be 16 or 32 bits. Also, some elements may be left out. Address register, base displacement and index register are optional. If the address register and displacement are omitted, for example, and a data register is used as the index register, the result is data register indirect addressing, which is normally not available.

Syntax: (Bd.An.Rn.SIZE *  SCALE) 

(Bd -  base displacement) 

Memory Indirect with Postindex: 

Also new with the 68030 are the memory indirect modes. These methods first compute an address in memory, from which an operand address is then read. In this case there are two displacements: the base displacement and the outer displacement. The former is added to the address register in computing the memory address, the latter is added to the operand address. The index register is likewise added to the operand address after multiplication by a  scaling value as described earlier. This is why the term postindex is used. This method can also omit certain elements, and the CPU will assume them to be zeros.

Value from Address Register 

Base Displacement 

Memory Address 

Value from above Memory Address 

Value from Index Register (.W,.L) *  1 , 2, 4 or 8 

Outer Displacement 

Operand Address 

Syntax: 

([Bd,An],Rn.SIZE*SCALE,Od) 

(Bd -  base displacement, Od -  outer displacement) 

The square brackets indicate the memory address from which the operand address is read.

Memory Indirect with Preindex: 

This method is identical to the above, except that the index is added to the address register instead of the operand address.

Value from Address Register 

Value from Index Register (.W,.L) *  1 ,2,4 or 8 

Base Displacement 

Memory Address 

Value from above Memory Address 

Outer Displacement 

Operand Address 

Syntax: 

([Bd,An,Rn.SIZE*SCALE],Od) 

PC-relative Addressing: 

The following addressing methods can use the Program
Counter (PC) instead of an address register as a  base value: 

• indirect with displacement 

• indirect with index and 8-bit displacement 

• indirect with index and base-displacement 

• memory indirect with postindex 

• memory indirect with preindex 

All access then takes place not in the User or Supervisor
Data region but in the corresponding Program region. 

These addressing methods are thus suited mainly for quick reference to nonvariable data, for example constants, which reside with the program in the code segment (see Operating
System). PC-relative memory access always refers to data 

that resides a  certain distance from the current instruction, independent of the instruction's memory address.

Instructions 

The majority of instructions for the 68030 are those that applied to the
68000, with some enhancement of addressing capabilities or additional 

data types. For example, two long words can be multiplied to produce a quad word as the result.

New instructions are the bit field operations, some system control 

instructions, multiprocessor instructions and, of course, the cache, coprocessor and MMU commands.

«53 

Data Transfer Instructions 

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

EXG 

Rn.Rn 

Rn <- ->Rn 

LEA 

<ea>,An 

<ea> -> An 

LINK 

An,<d> 

16,32 

Sp -  4 -> Sp: An -> (SP): 

SP ->atw12 An, SP +  D -> SP 

MOVE 

<ea>,<ea> 

8,16,32 

source -> dest

MOVEA 

<ea>,An 

16,32->32 

MOVEM 

list,<ea>

16,32 

Register list -> dest 

<ea>,list 

16,32 -> 32 

source -> Register list

MOVEP 

Dn,(d16,An) 

16,32 

Dn(31:24)->(An +  d): 

Dn(23:16)->An +  d+2: 

Dn(15:8)->(An +  d +  4): 

Dn(7:0) -> (An +  d +  6) 

(d16,An),Dn 

(An+d)->Dn(31:24): 

(An+d+2)->Dn(23:16): 

(An +  d +  4)->Dn(15:8): 

(An +  d +  6) -> Dn(7:0) 

MOVEQ 

#<data>,Dn 

8->32 

direct data -> dest

PEA 

<ea> 

SP-4 -> SP: <ea> -> (SP) 

UNLK 

An 

An -> SP: (SP) -> An:
SP +  4 -> SP 

Remarks: 

The MOVEP instruction (Move Peripheral) transfers data between the processor and peripheral components having only an 8-bit data bus. Although it isn't needed on the 68030, this instruction is retained for compatibility with the 68000. In the 68000 with its 16-bit bus width, two consecutive byte registers occupy consecutive word, not byte, addresses. This means that alternate bytes are unused. Four MOVE.B instructions are required to move a  long word into as many consecutive registers.
MOVEP increments the address to the next word with each byte 

and skips over the gaps. Thus a  word or long word can be written to consecutive registers with a  single instruction. The 68030's bus width is dynamic. With every bus cycle it determines whether the address it is about to access is 8, 16, or 32 bits long. Thus even 8-bit chip registers have consecutive addresses in memory.

<data> in MOVEQ (Move Quick) represents an 8-bit value this is 

expanded to 32 bits.

Arithmetic Operations 

All arithmetic operations work with signed integers. ADDX, SUBX and
NEGX computations include the X-Flag. By multiple executions of these 

instructions, computations can be performed on numbers larger than one long word.

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

ADD 

Dn,<ea> 

8,16,32 

source+dest -> dest

<ea>,Dn 

8,16,32 

ADDA 

<ea>,Dn 

16,32 

ADDI 

#<data>,<ea> 

8,16,32 

direct data +  dest -> dest

ADDQ i 

8,16,32 

ADDX 

Dn,Dn 

8,16,32 

source +  dest +  X -> dest

-(An).-(An) 

8,16,32 

CLR 

<ea> 

8,16,32 

0 -> dest 

CMP 

<ea>,Dn 

8,16,32 

dest -  source

CMPA 

<ea>,An 

16,32 

CMPI 

8,16,32 

dest -  direct data

CMPM 

(An)+,(An)+ 

8,16,32 

dest -  source

CMP2 

<ea>,Rn 

8,16,32 

DIVS/DIVU 

<ea>,Dn 

32/16 -> 16:16 

dest/source -> dest (with or without sign)

<ea>,Dr:Dq 

64/32 -> 32:32 

<ea>,Dq 

32/32 -> 32 

DIVSL7DIVUL 

<ea>,Dr:Dq 

32/32 -> 32:32 

EXT 

Dn 

8-> 16 

with sign extended dest -> dest

Dn 

16->32 

EXTB 

Dn 

8->32 

MULS/MULU 

<ea>,Dn 

16x16->32 

source x  dest -> dest (with or without sign)

<ea>,DI 

32 x  32 -> 32 

<ea>,Dh:DI 

32 x  32 -> 64 

NEG 

<ea> 

8,16,32 

0 -  dest -> dest 

NEGX 

<ea> 

8,16,32 

0 -  dest -  X -> dest 

SUB 

<ea>,Dn 

8,16,32 

dest -  source -> dest

Dn,<ea> 

8,16,32 

SUBA 

<ea>,An 

16,32 

SUBI 

8,16,32 

dest -  direct data -> dest

SUBQ 

8,16,32 

SUBX 

Dn,Dn 

8,16,32 

dest -  source -  X -> dest

-(An).-(An) 

8,16,32 

Remarks: 

<data> in SUBQ and ADDQ must be 0  through 7. 

• In multiplication and division (MUL, DIV) quad words can also be 

used (64 bits). In this case, two data registers are declared instead of one.

Logical Operations 

These instructions perform the logical linking functions (And, Or,
Exclusive-or and Negation). 

The TST instruction subtracts 0  from an operand and sets the appropriate condition codes in the Status Register. This can be used to test a  value in memory for zero.

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

AND 

<ea>,Dn 

8,16,32 

source /  dest -> dest

Dn,<ea> 

8,16,32 

ANDI 

8,16,32 

Data /  dest -> dest 

EOR 

Dn,<data> <ea> 

8,16,32 

source EOR dest -> dest

EORI 

8,16,32 

Data EOR dest -> dest 

NOT 

<ea> 

8,16,32 

dest -> dest

OR 

<ea>,Dn 

8,16,32 

source OR dest -> dest

Dn,<ea> 

8,16,32 

ORI 

8,16,32 

Data OR dest -> dest 

TST 

<ea> 

8,16,32 

source -  0 to set cond.codes

Shift and Rotation Instructions 

Shift and rotation instructions differ in whether or not bits displaced from 

one end of the operand are brought around to the other. ROXR and
ROXL also include the X-Bit of the Status Register in the rotation. 

Shift instructions differ with regard to the MSB. In the arithmetic shift 

instruction it is interpreted as a  sign and retained when shifting right, while in the logical variant it is replaced by zero. When shifting left there is no difference between the arithmetic (ASL) and the logical (LSL) version of the instruction. With all these instructions one declares the number of bits to be shifted, followed by a  data register. Permissible values are 1  through 8  with immediate addressing and 1  through 63 when using a  data register. A memory location can also be shifted directly, but only as a  word and only by one bit at a  time. The swap instruction switches the two words in a  data register.

Operand Syntax 

On, On 

# ((Jala), On 

(ea) 

On. Dn 

o (data), Dn
(ea) 

Dn, Dn 

* (data), Dn 

(ea) 

Dn, Dn 

* (data), Dn 

(ea) 

On, Dn 

it (data). Dn
(ea) 

Dn, Dn 

ft (data), Dn
(ea) 

Dn. Dn 

s (data). Dn
(ea) 

Dn, Dn 

# (data), Dn 

(ea) 

Operand Size 

S. 1G, 32 

8. 16, 32 

8. 16. 32 

8, 16, 32 

8, 16. 32 

8, 16, 32 

8, 16, 32 

8, 16, 32 

8. 16. 32 

8. 16, 32 

8. 16, 32 

8, 16, 32 

8. 16. 32 

8. 16. 32 

8. 16. 32 

8. 16. 32 

Operation 

\yuc\+-{~+- 

[-»! ,  » V*FZ\ 

Qi/c}*-[3E 

►i »  h»f««l 

m^

>3 

^i 

iPM rrVn «       i*-nrw

L>nn-»r=^>L»rvi 

Imsw I  LSW I 

A I

Shift and Rotation Instructions 

Bit Data Type Instructions 

All bit manipulation instructions set the Zero-Flag according to the condition of the selected bit. Then the bit is either cleared (BCLR), set
(BSET) or inverted (BCHG). The bit number can be declared immediately 

or in a  data register.

//. The A3000 Hardware 

Instruction 

Operand 

Operand 

Operation 

Syntax 

Format/Size

BCHG 

Dn,<ea> 

8,32 

- <bit number> from dest->Z- 

>bit of dest 

8,32 

BCLR 

Dn,<ea> 

8,32 

- <bit number> from dest ->

8,32 

0->bit of dest 

BSET 

Dn,<ea> 

8,32 

- <bit number> from dest ->

8,32 

1 ->bit of dest 

BTST 

Dn,<ea> 

8,32 

- <bit numbeo from dest ->

8,32 

Bitfield Instructions 

The bitfield commands transfer the MSB of the field to the N  flag and set the Zero flag if all bits of the field are null. Then the corresponding operation is performed.

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

BFCHG 

<ea> (offset:length) 

1-32 

Field -> Field 

BFCLR 

<ea> (offset:length) 

1-32 

0-> Field 

BFEXTS 

<ea> (offset:length),Dn 

1-32 

Field -> Dn extend sign 

BFEXTU 

<ea> (offset:length),Dn 

1-32 

Field -> Dn extend unsign 

(zero) 

BFFFO 

<ea> (offset:length),Dn 

1-32 

Searches for first set bit in 

field offset -> Dn

BFINS 

Dn,<ea> (offset:length) 

1-32 

Dn -> Field 

BFSET 

<ea> (offset:length) 

1-32 

1 -> Field 

BFTST 

<ea> (offset:length) 

1-32 

MSB -> N  (OR all )->

Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) Instructions 

ABCD, SBCD and NBCD execute the corresponding arithmetic 

operations with packed BCD numbers. Converting between packed and unpacked format of BCD numbers is accomplished by using the PACK and UNPACK instructions.

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Operand 

Size 

Operation 

ABCD 

Dn.Dn 

sourcel 0-Klest1 0+X-
>dest 

-(An).-(An) 

NBCD 

<ea> 

0-dest10-X->dest 

PACK 

(An).-(An) 

#<data> 

16->8 

Unpacked source+Data- 

>packed dest 

Dn,Dn#<data> 

16->8 

SBCD 

Dn.Dn 

destl 0-source 1 OX ~>dest

-(An),(An) 

UNPK 

(An).-(An) 

8->16 

packed source- unpacked source

unpacked source+data-
>unpacked source 

Dn,Dn,#<data>8->16 

Program Flow Control 

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Operand 

Size 

Operation 

ABCD 

Dn.Dn 

sourcel 04dest1 0+X-
>dest 

-(An).-(An) 

NBCD 

<ea> 

0-dest10-X->dest 

PACK 

(An).-(An) 

16->8 

unpacked source+data-
>packed dest 

Dn,Dn#<data> 

16->8 

SBCD 

Dn.Dn 

destl 0-source1 0-X->dest

-(An),(An) 

UNPK 

(An)(-(An) 

8->16 

packed source-
>unpacked source 

unpacked source+data-
>unpacked source 

Dn,Dn,#<data>8->16 

Remarks: 

The variable 'cc' can be replaced by any of the following condition codes:

Code 

Condition 

T 

true (not used with Bcc)

F 

false (not used with Bcc)

HI 

higher, logically

LS 

lower or same, logically

CC(HS) 

C(arry) flag cleared, logically higher or same 

CS(LO) 

C(arry) flag set, logically lower 

NE 

not equal, Z(ero) flag cleared

EQ 

equal, Z(ero) flag set

VC 

Overflow clear, V  flag cleared 

VS 

Overflow set, V  flag set 

PL 

Plus, N(egative) flag cleared 

Ml 

Minus, N(egative) flag set 

QE 

greater or equal, arithmetically

LT 

lower than, arithmetically

GT 

greater than, arithmetically

LE 

lower or equal, arithmetically By testing the flags after a  CMP or SUB operation (see arithmetic instructions), the relationship between the two operands can be determined. If, for example, the second number is greater than the first, the condition GT will be true.

Again there is a  difference between logical and arithmetic operations in 

terms of the sign. Since, for example, the byte $FF can stand for either -1 or +255, comparing it with 0  will return $FF >  0 as a  logical condition
(without sign) and $FF <  0 as an arithmetic condition (with sign). 

In other instructions, relational statements, such as greater than, are not definitive. Here the condition codes are used to test the condition of an individual bit. For example, after a  bitfield instruction, BEQ checks whether the Zero flag was set, meaning that all bits in the field were cleared, instead of checking for equality. Therefore both meanings are given in the above table.

RTD fetches a  return address from the stack and sets the stack 

pointer to the value of <data>.

• RTR fetches another word from the stack before the return address 

and writes it to the CCR.

System Control Instructions 

This instruction set is comprised of the privileged instructions
(executable only in supervisor mode), instructions that generate Trap 

Exceptions and those that write to the Condition Code Register (CCR). 

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

Privileged 

ANDI 

#<data>,SR 

direct data AND SR ->
SR 

EORI 

direct data EOR SR ->
SR 

MOVE 

<ea>,SR 

source -> SR

SR,<ea> 

SR -> dest 

MOVE 

USP.An 

USP -> An 

An.USP 

An -> USP

MOVEC 

Rc,Rn 

Re -> Rn 

Rn.Rc 

Rn -> Re 

MOVES 

Rn,<ea> 

8,16,32 

Rn -> dest with DFC 

<ea>,Rn 

source with SFC -> Rn

ORI 

direct data V  SR -> SR

RESET 

none none

RTE 

none none

(SP) -> SR SP +  2 (SP) 

-> PC SP +  4 -> SP 

STOP 

TRAP Generating 

direct data -> SR

BKPT 

none

CHK 

<ea>,Dn 

16,32 

if Dn <  0 or Dn >  (ea),
CHK is called 

CHK2 

<ea>,Rn 

8,16,32 

ILLEGAL 

none none

SSP -  2 -> SSP vector 

offset -> (SSP)

SSP -  4 -> SSP PC -> 

(SSP) 

SSP -  2 -> SSP SR -> 

(SSP) 

vector address of illegal instruction -> PC

TRAP 

none

SSP -  2 -> SSP 

SSP -  4 -> SSP PC -> 

(SSP) SSP -  2 -> SSP 

SR -> (SSP) vector 

address -> PC

TRAPcc 

none none executes TRAP if cc is true

16,32 

TRAPV 

none

Condition Code Register 

none

ANDI 

#<data>,CCR 

direct data AND CCR ->
CCR 

m

Instruction 

Syntax 

Size 

Comments 

EORI 

direct data EOR CCR ->
CCR 

MOVE 

<ea>,CCR 

source -> CCR

CCR,<ea> 

CCR -> dest 

ORI 

direct data V  CCR ->
CCR 

Multiprocessor Instructions 

Multiprocessor instructions are all those that carry out a  Read-Modify- 

Write bus cycle. What does this mean? 

In a  multiprocessor system (e.g., the Amiga with a  PC/AT expansion card), CPUs running in parallel can access the same memory region. Let's assume there is a  common data structure in which only one processor is allowed to work at any given time. Each CPU has a  place in memory where it signals its activity to the other. This is done by means of the IBD bit (Ich bin dran, German for 'I am here'). In preparing to access the data structure in question, CPU A  has just read CPU B's IBD bit and, seeing that it is free, is about to set its own bit on. At this time, CPU B  makes the same check and also concludes that the data structure is available for access. The result is conflicting access by both CPUs. There are software solutions for the mutual access exclusion problem, but the 68030 offers a  faster and simpler one in its hardware. During a
Read-Modify- Write cycle, it signals the hardware that controls RAM that 

this process may not be interrupted. Thus CPU A  can complete its setting of the IBD bit before CPU B  is allowed to check it.

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Operand 

Operation 

Read-Modify-Write 

Size 

CAS 

Dc,Du,<ea> 

8,16,32 

dest-Dc->CC If Z  is set., then Du->dest else dest->Dc

CAS2 

Dc1:Dc2 

,Du1:Du2 

,(Rn):(Rn) 

8,16,32 

two operands CAS

TAS 

<ea> 

dest-0, set cond.codes
1->dest(7) Coprocessor 

cpBcc

<Label> 

16,32 

If cpcc true, then pc+D->PC cpDBcc

<Label>,Dn 

If cpcc false, then Dn-1->Dn If Dn <> 1 , then PC+d->PC cpGEN user def. user def. operand->coprocessor cpRESTORE

<ea> 

none

Restore coprocessor status 

from <ea>

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Read-Modify-Write 

Operand 

Size 

Operation 

cpSAVE

<ea> 

none

Save coprocessor status 

to<ea> cpScc

<ea> 

If cpcc true, then 1's->dest, else 0's->dest cpTRAPcc none

none

16,32 

If cpcc true, then generate
TRAPcc Exception 

Exceptions 

With an exception the processor interrupts the currently executing program and jumps to a  routine that handles the error or carries out the desired action. An exception on the 68030, then, includes anything that interrupts normal program execution: reset, interrupts, software errors, bus errors, etc.

Exception handling takes place in several steps: 

1. First the CPU makes an internal copy of the Status Register. Then 

the Supervisor Bit is set, the Trace Bits cleared and, if the exception was an interrupt, the Interrupt Priority Mask adjusted.

2. Now the vector number is ascertained, which depending on the 

exception type, is either already provided or must be read over the bus (interrupts, coprocessor).

3. With a  Reset (which also is considered an exception), the processor 

saves its current internal position on the stack, so that the interrupted program can resume after exception processing. With an interrupt, if the Master bit is set, the CPU clears it and rewrites the information to the stack. However, this time it's written to the
Interrupt Stack (ISP) rather than the Master Stack (MSP). 

The exact format of the stack data varies greatly among the various exception types. Always present are the vector offset, the old value of the Program Counter, and the Status Register (saved initially).

4. In the final step, the processor reads the exception routine address 

from the vector table and begins its execution. The remainder of the exception handling is then accomplished by the software.

Vector Number(n) 

Vector Offset Hex 

Meaning 

Interrupt Stack Pointer after Reset 

Program Counter (PC) after Reset 

Bus error 

OOC 

Address error 

Illegal instruction 

Division by zero 

CHK-, CHK2-instruction 

01C 

cpTRAPcc-, TRAPcc-, TRAPV- instruction

Privilege violation 

Single step (Trace) 

Line 1010 emulation 

02C 

Line 1111 emulation 

Reserved (not used) 

Coprocessor protocol violation 

Format error

03C 

Uninitialized interrupt 

through

Reserved 

05C 

Spurious interrupt 

Level 1  interrupt autovector 

Level 2  interrupt autovector 

06C 

Level 3  interrupt autovector 

Level 4  interrupt autovector 

Level 5  interrupt autovector 

Level 6  interrupt autovector 

07C 

Level 7  interrupt autovector 

through

TRAP 0-15 

instruction vectors

0BC 

OCO 

FPCP-branching or Set by 

unregulated condition

0C4 

FPCP Inexact result 

0C8 

FPCP Division by zero 

OCC 

FPCP Underflow 

0D0 

FPCP Operations error 

0D4 

FPCP Overflow 

0D8 

FPCP Signaled NAN 

0DC 

Reserved 

0E0 

MMU setting error 

0E4 

Provided for MC68851 (not used 

in MC68030)

0E8 

Provided for MC68851 (not used 

in MC68030)

OEC 

through

Reserved 

OFC 

Vector Number(n) Vector Offset Hex Meaning 

through

User-defined 

vectors

3FC 

Every exception is assigned a  specific vector, except for interrupts, whose vectors are generated as required by the appropriate hardware. All vectors consist of a  long word with the address of the appropriate exception handler. The Exception Vector Table has 256 entries, thus a size of IK. Its address in memory can be determined by the Vector Base
Register. After a  reset it will be at address 0, the beginning of system 

memory.

Exception Types 

Reset, Vectors O&l 

Reset is the only exception that does not permit resumption of the old 

program. The processor clears all internal registers without saving anything on the stack, and the caches and MMU are shut off. In the
Status Register, the Supervisor Bit is set and the Interrupt Mask set to 7. 

It then begins program execution at the address in Vector 1. Vector 0  is written to the ISP as initialization value.

Bus Error, Vector 2 

If a  bus access cannot proceed because of error, for example, when an attempt is made to write to ROM, the hardware can inform the CPU by signaling a  bus error. All processors of the 680x0 family have the /BERR line for this purpose. In the Amiga, a  bus error is caused only by expansion cards claiming the same or illegal addresses.

Address Error, Vector 3 

An address error results when an instruction that must be at an even address is read at an odd address. This occurs much more frequently on the 68000, since there access of words and long words is also forbidden at odd addresses.

Illegal Instruction, Vector 4 

Line- A- and Line-F-emulator, Vectors 10 &  1 1 

These exceptions are assigned to the various bit patterns that do not represent a  valid instruction (words with hexadecimal A  ($Axxx) in the upper four bits, those with F  ($Fxxx), and other illegal bit patterns.

Line-A-emulation can be used to implement proprietary instructions, 

which can then be executed over the exception handler. Distinguishing among various functions is done by means of the lower 12 bits.

Line F  distinguishes whether bits 9  through 1 1 of the instruction word 

are unequal to zero. This indicates a  coprocessor instruction. Only when this is not the case, that is, the hardware signals a  bus error in accessing the instruction, does an F-line exception occur. Otherwise the coprocessor executes the instruction. With this mechanism it is possible to emulate entire coprocessor functions via software in the exception handler, as if it were actually present. If the
FPU is present, the software can be reused without change. In the 

A3000, since the coprocessor is completely integrated, there is no need 

to worry about its emulation. If bits 9  through 1 1 equal zero, then, depending on the bit pattern in the lower half of the instruction word, either it is a  valid MMU instruction or the F-line exception occurs. But since MMU instructions are permitted only in supervisor mode, an instruction word in the form $F0xx in user mode always results in a  privilege violation.

Privilege Violation, Vector 8 

A privilege violation occurs when one of the following instructions is executed in user mode:

ANDI to SR, EOR to SR, FRESTORE, FSAVE, MOVE from SR, MOVE to 

SR, MOVE USP, MOVEC, MOVES, ORI to SR, PFLUSH, PMOVE, 

PLOAD, PTEST, RESET, RTE, STOP 

These instructions apply only in supervisor mode. Note: The instruction
'MOVE from SR' was permitted in user mode on the 68000. On the 

68030 it is permitted only in supervisor mode. 

Zero Divide, Vector 5 

CHK and TRAP Instructions, Vectors 6  & 7 

Instruction Trap Exceptions occur with the corresponding condition in 

an instruction. They are intentional and signal an arithmetic or logical error condition in the program:

• Division by zero 

• TRAPcc instruction with valid condition 

CHK or CHK2 detect a  partition overwrite 

Trace Exception, Vector 9 

The 68030 has two trace modes to facilitate debugging. They are selected using the Trace Bits in the Status Register:

T1 TO Trace mode 

Trace disabled 

Trace every transfer of control (BRA, JMP etc.) 

Trace every instruction 

not implemented

Depending on the selected mode, a  trace exception follows every 

instruction or only those that transfer program flow. Within the exception handling routines the trace bits are set to zero to inhibit subsequent trace exceptions.

Trace mode makes it possible to follow the execution of a  program step 

by step.

Independent of the mode selected, an instruction that writes to the Status 

Register generates a  trace exception. 

Format Error, Vector 14 The 68030 places varying numbers of words on the stack depending on the type of exception. These are returned from the stack by the RTE instruction (Return from Exception) so that the interrupted program can continue processing. A  format error exception occurs when the processor detects an illegal stack format and cannot restore the previous state. This error is caused by programs that overwrite stack data.

Interrupts 

A number of vectors are assigned to interrupts: the spurious interrupt vector, 24, the seven autovectors, 25 -  31, all user-defined vectors, 64 -
255, and the uninitialized interrupt vector, 15. 

As was previously mentioned in the discussion of the Status Register, an interrupt exception is called only when the interrupt level in the SR is lower than that of the signal in the interrupt entry. If this is the case, the
68030 attempts to read the appropriate interrupt vector over the data 

bus. It executes for this purpose an Interrupt Acknowledge Cycle, by which the hardware detects that its interrupt request has been acknowledged and that it can make a  vector available. Now there are three possibilities:

• The hardware delivers a  vector (in the range of 64 -  255). 

• It signals an autovector interrupt with one of the seven autovectors 

(25 -  31), according to the interrupt level. This is the case with the 

Amiga. 

• It responds with a  bus error and the spurious interrupt (24) occurs. 

The Uninitialized Interrupt (15) occurs when a  peripheral chip tries to deliver a  vector that has not yet been initialized by the processor. This vector is therefore not generated by the processor, but rather is read by the Interrupt Acknowledge Cycle when, due to a  software error, the corresponding vector register in the chip that produced the interrupt has not been set.

### 11.2.1 The PMMU

With the Paged Memory Management Unit, the 68030 provides hardware-controlled memory management and protection for the operating system. The PMMU supports two mechanisms to implement this control:

1. The generation of a  virtual address space for each task. 

2. The validation of authorization for every memory access. 

Virtual Memory 

Formerly, any reference to address locations or memory in the Amiga referred to the physical memory, that is, the actual RAM chips. In earlier models than the A3000, every address transmitted over the address bus selects one precise memory location in the corresponding component. This fixed assignment of addresses from the processor to the various registers and memory locations is inherent in the hardware and normally cannot be changed. Although there are some exceptions to this rule (e.g., bank switching), they don't apply to the Amiga. So, for every address, there is only one memory location. In a  multitasking operating system, where two or more tasks can run concurrently, the tasks must utilize different addresses for their data. When a  task occupies memory, it reduces the amount available to all other tasks. Eventually memory becomes so fragmented from continuos allocation and de-allocation, that sufficient contiguous memory for even a simple function is no longer available. Without the PMMU, logical memory (the memory addresses used by the machine-language instructions of the various tasks) is identical to physical memory. In a  system with virtual memory management, every task is assigned its own logical address partition. The maximum size of each partition is theoretically the entire address space, or 4  Gigabytes with the 68030. This logical address partition does not exist physically. Each task has 4
Gigabytes of memory, but only in a  "virtual" sense. A  specific correlation 

must be established between physical memory (usually only 1  Megabyte in 68030-based computers) and the logical addresses of all the tasks. The
PMMU does just that. For every memory access, it translates the logical 

address to the appropriate physical address and also validates the access authority of the task for the area in question. The fundamental unit of memory on which these mechanisms operate is called a  page. The entire logical address space is divided into equal-size pages (page size may be as small as 256 bytes or as large 32K). A  logical page can be mapped to a  physical page of the same size. Physical pages in memory are sometimes referred to as frames. Of course not all logical pages can map cumulatively to main memory frames, since the virtual address space far exceeds the physical. This fact is transparent, though, to executing tasks, which share memory without even "knowing" it. If a task requests a  page that is not currently in memory, the MMTJ detects this condition, called a  page fault, and generates a  bus error. The operating system can now load the desired page to an available frame in
RAM. If none is available, a  page can be swapped to disk and 

temporarily saved to make room for the new logical page, and the fault can be satisfied.

Besides managing the transparent sharing of memory among tasks, the 

PMMU also solves the problem of memory fragmentation. Physically 

noncontiguous available fragments can be allocated by the PMMU in such a  way as to logically satisfy a  task's request for contiguous address space. These capabilities are not implemented in the current version of the
Amiga operating system. However, it is worthwhile to study the 

functions and programming of the processes previously described, since the PMMU is a  fixed part of the Amiga 3000 hardware. Also, virtual addressing is used by the UNIX operating system, which Commodore also offers for the 3000. Finally, a  knowledge of the PMMU will allow you to experiment with your own applications. To perform the translation of logical into physical addresses, the PMMU naturally needs information about the allocation of pages requested by the operating system. A  multi-level structure called a  translation tree is constructed in main memory for this purpose. The translation tree indicates whether the desired logical page is contained in a  physical page frame and if so, which one. If the tree were to be scanned for every memory access, however, the
CPU would have to sacrifice most of its processing power for this task 

alone. In reality the PMMU slows program execution by only 1  to 2%. The solution lies again in a  cache: the ATC (Address Translation Cache). Every time a  valid allocation is read from the translation tree, the PMMU transfers it to the ATC. The ATC has room for up to 22 entries. Upon subsequent request for any of these pages, the cache signals their availability to the PMMU. As long as a  time-consuming table search is avoided, memory access with PMMU address translation is just as fast as without it.

Only when a  program references a  page for the first time or when more 

than 22 pages are needed will the search be performed. Since this rarely happens, as mentioned earlier, the processing time is barely affected. The program model of the PMMU consists of six registers:

CPU (or User) Root pointer (CRP) 

Supervisor Root pointer (SRP) 

Translation Control Register (TC) 

Transparent Translation Register 1  (TTO) 

Transparent Translation Register 2  (TT1) 

MMU Status Register (MMUSR) 

The root pointer registers hold translation tree starting addresses. You can choose between separate trees for user and supervisor programs or a single common tree. If only one tree is used, its address must be in the
CPU root pointer. 

The transparent translation registers make it possible to reference any two address regions without address translation. Their logical addresses then are the same as the physical, as though the MMU were disabled. This function is useful for larger areas which require quick access, for example screen memory. Since such an area consists of many pages that are accessed in no particular sequence, the 22 ATC entries are not sufficient to avoid frequent searching of the translation tree tables. It is more efficient to reference these areas without the MMU.

MMU Transparent Translation Registers TTO and TT1: 

BitNr.: 

Function: 

31-24 

Address bits 31 through 24 of the transparent region 

23-16 

Mask for above address bits 

E -  Enable bit for transparent region 

14-11 

Unused 

CI -  Cache inhibit 

R/W -  Read/write 

RWM -  Read/write mask 

Unused 

6-4 

Function code base of region 

Unused 

2-0 

Function code mask 

Address bits and mask 

The transparent window has a  minimum size of 16 Meg. The eight address bits in the TTx register specify its address. The masking bits can be used to define larger windows. When one of these is set, its corresponding address bit is ignored.

Enable bit (E) 

Setting the E  bit to 1  enables the transparent region defined by the TTx 

register.

Cache inhibit (CI) 

The CI bit allows you to choose whether or not values from the transparent region should be placed in the data and instruction caches
(1 =  no caching). 

R/W and RWM 

The R/W bit specifies the type of access that should be transparent:

R/W =  0 Write access 

R/W =  1 Read access 

To grant both types, the RWM bit must be set:

RWM =  0 Access according to R/W bit 

RWM =  1 Ignore R/W bit 

Function code base and function code mask 

The base field determines the region's function code. If you want it to be transparent for more than one specific function code, you can use the mask to choose which bits of the base field should be ignored (mask =  1).

Translation Control Register (TC) 

The TC register controls the construction of the translation tree. The root of this tree is found in the CPU root pointer register. That address points to the first table, or level, of the tree. Each entry in this highest table
(level A) points to a  table at the next level (level B). The tree continues to 

branch until the lowest level, which contains the actual page addresses, is reached.

Page Pointer Tables 

The logical address consists of up to six fields, which are used to move through the various levels of tables. The fields (with the exception of the first one) represent indexes for successive branches of the translation tree. Here is how the individual fields look in relation to the logical address:

Bits 31 

Bits 31 -IS 

Bits 31-IS-TIA 

Bits 31-IS-TIA-TIB 

Bits 31-IS-TIA-TIB-TIC 

Bits 31-IS-TIA-TIB-TIC-TID 

Shown another way: 

Logical address: 

to 31 -IS to 31-IS-TIA to 31-IS-TIA-TIB to 31-IS-TIA-TIB-TIC to 31-IS-TIA-TIB-TIC-TID to bit 0

Ignored 

Table A  index 

Table B  index 

Table C  index 

Table D  index 

Page offset 

31 BitNr 0 

IS|TIA|TIB|TIC|TID|Pageoffset 

The IS (initial shift) field is a  series of up to 15 bits, starting with bit 31, which are to be ignored by the MMU. Because the IS bits are not considered, the same physical address is allocated by the MMU regardless of their value, so the effect of the shift is to reduce the logical address space accordingly. Where IS =  the number of bits in the initial shift field, the shift reflects a  reduction of address space by a  factor of
2IS. 

TIA through TID are table indexes A  through B. Each index can be from 

0 to 15 bits long, except for TIA, which must be at least 1  bit. With a  TIA 

length of five bits, for example, the five most significant bits of the logical address (after the IS) are used as an index to the highest level of the translation tree. This table must then have 25, or 32 entries. Each entry points to a  table at level B. The size of the TIB field (again as a  power of
2) indicates the number of entries in the level B  tables. This pattern 

continues down to level D. The remaining bits of the logical address form the page offset, the relative position of the desired memory location within the page. It is not necessary to use all four levels of tables. The translation tree terminates when a  null TIx field is reached. If TIC =  0, the tree is limited to levels A  andB.

Even a  fifth level can be used by setting the FCL (function code lookup) 

enable bit in the TC register. As the name suggests, the function code bits then become part of the table lookup algorithm. This is implemented with another table, consisting of eight entries, preceding the A  level. The root pointer points to this table. The function code bits are used to select from the eight entries, which in turn point to tables of level A.

Translation Control Register Layout 

BitNr. 

Name 

Function 

31 | 

E 

Enables the MMU 

30-26 

. 

Unused 

SRE 

Enables supervisor root pointer (separate translation 

trees for user and supervisor mode)

FCL 

Function code lookup enable 

23-20 

PS 

Pagesize: 

1000 -256 Bytes 

1001 -512 Bytes 

1010-1 KByte 

1011 -2 KByte 

1100 -4 KByte 

1101 -8 KByte 

1110 -16 KByte 

1 1 1 1 -  32 KByte 

19-16 

IS 

Initial Shift (0 to 15) 

15-12 

TIA 

Table Index A  (1 to 15) 

11-8 

TIB 

Table Index B  (0 to 15) 

7-4 

TIC 

Table Index C  (0 to 15) 

3-0 

TID 

Table Index D  (0 to 15) 

PS, IS, TIA -  TID must clearly establish the use of the individual bits of the 

logical address. Their sum must always be 32. Otherwise the MMU generates an MMU configuration exception.

Elements of the Translation Tree 

The various tables of the translation tree can contain different types of entries called descriptors. A  descriptor consists of a  pointer to a  memory page or to the next level of tables, as well as control information about the subsequent structure of the tables or about the memory that the descriptor addresses. Not every descriptor type contains all the following fields:

DT Descriptor type 

This 2-bit field can contain the following:

Invalid, DT=0 

If the MMU encounters an invalid descriptor, it terminates its search and reports a  bus error to the CPU. Invalid descriptors allow the translation tree to start out in skeleton form (in which these descriptors point to as yet undefined locations), and to be completed only as needed (when bus errors occur).

Page descriptor, DT=1 

A page descriptor also terminates the MMU's search, but signals a successful completion because it contains the address of the desired memory page.

Valid 4  bytes, DT=2 

This designates a  valid pointer to a  table of the next lower level. All entries in this table must be 4  bytes long.

Valid 8  bytes, DT=3 

Same as above, but the table being addressed must contain 8  byte 

entries.

U Used 

This bit is automatically set when the MMU reads the descriptor. It can be used, for example, to determine whether a  certain memory page has been accessed.

M Modified 

This bit indicates a  write access to the allocated memory page.

WP Write protect 

If this bit is set in one of the descriptors read during a  table search, a corresponding page may not be written. This is useful, for example, to prohibit subsequent changes after modifying Kickstart in RAM.

S Supervisor only 

This bit designates a  table or memory page that may be referenced by supervisor programs only. Reference by user programs results in a bus error.

Q Cache inhibit 

Many addresses may not be cached. This is true primarily for the 

various peripheral chip registers or for areas of memory that can be changed independently of the CPU (the dual-ported RAM on the
PC/AT plug-in board and chip memory). 

Caching can be turned off for the corresponding memory pages 

using the CI bit. When the CI bit is set, the CPU does not transfer these pages to the cache as they are read.

LIMIT and L/U bit 

The 15-bit limit field can be used to limit the index to the next table. The MMU checks to see if the index value contained in the logical address is higher than the limit when the L/U bit =  0, or lower than the limit when L/U =  1. The L/U (lower/upper) bit determines whether the index has a  lower or an upper limit.

Page address 

This 24-bit field contains the physical page address that corresponds to the requested logical address. Depending on the page size (see Translation Control Register), some of the bits are unused. With 4K pages, 12 bits are needed to address a  location within the page. These are taken directly from the logical address
(the page offset). Then only the upper 20 bits of the page address 

field are used to establish the address of the page.

Table address 

This 28-bit field contains the base address of the descriptor table of the next lower level.

Descriptor address 

This is a  30-bit pointer to another descriptor. It is used only by indirect descriptors (see the following). The Various Descriptor Types

Bits labeled "unused" can be used to store values as needed (e.g., 

additional status information for memory management).

Root pointer (either CPU or Supervisor Root Pointer Register) 

LW BitNr. Function 

30-16 

15-2 

1-0 

31-4 

3-0 

LAI bit for limit 

Limit value 

Must be zero 

DT (descriptor type) of root pointer 

Table address 

Unused 

Short Format Table Descriptor (4 bytes) 

BitNr. Function 

31-4 

1-0 

Table address 

U (Used) 

WP (Write protect) 

DT (Descriptor type) =  2 

Long Format Table Descriptor (8 bytes) 

LW 

BitNr. 

Function 

LAI bit for limit 

30-16 

Limit value 

15-10 

Must be 1  's 

Must be zero 

7-4 

S (Supervisor only) 

Must be zero 

1-0 

31-4 

U (Used) 

WP (Write protect) 

DT (Descriptor type) =  3 

Table address 

3-0 

Unused 

Short Format Page Descriptor (4 bytes) 

BitNr. 

Function 

31-8 

Page address 

Must be zero 

CI (Cache inhibit) 

Must be zero 

M (Modified) 

U (Used) 

WP (Write protect) 

1-0 

DT (Descriptor type) =  1 

Long Format Page Descriptor (8 bytes) 

LW BitNr. 

Function 

30-16 

15-10 

1-0 

31-8 

7-0 

L/U bit for limit 

Limit value 

Must be 1's 

Must be zero 

S (Supervisor only) 

Must be zero 

CI (Cache inhibit) 

Must be zero 

M (Modified) 

U (Used) 

WP (Write protect) 

DT (Descriptor type) =  1 

Page address 

Unused 

Short Invalid Descriptor (4 bytes) 

BitNr. Function 

31-2 

1-0 

Unused 

DT (Descriptor type) =  0 

Long Invalid Descriptor (8 bytes) 

LW BitNr. 

Function 

31-2 

1-0 

31-0 

Unused 

DT (Descriptor type) =  0 

Unused 

Short Format Indirect Descriptor (4 bytes) 

BitNr. Function 

31-2 

1-0 

Descriptor address 

DT (Descriptor type) =  2 or 3 

Long Format Indirect Descriptor (8 bytes) 

LW BitNr. 

Function 

31-2 

1-0 

31-2 

1-0 

Unused 

DT (Descriptor type) =  2 or 3 

Descriptor address 

Unused 

//. The A3000 Hardware 

Early Termination and Memory Blocks 

Normally page descriptors are in the lowest level of the tree and table 

descriptors in the upper level. A  page descriptor that occurs at a  higher level is called an "Early Termination (ET)" page descriptor. It can be used to allocate a  consecutive area of physical addresses to all logical addresses belonging to a  table entry.

Assume that an ET page descriptor exists at the next-to-last table level, 

the last level contains 4096 entries, and the page size is 8K. A  32 Meg block (4096 x  8K) is then referenced by this ET descriptor. The descriptor's page address field contains the physical base address of the block. The logical base address is any bit combination that references the
ET descriptor in the translation tree. The bits of the logical address that 

normally would select one of the 4096 entries of the lowest level table now select the referenced page directly within the 32 Meg block. The lowest level table can be eliminated. Here is how the various bits in the logical address are used relative to the previous example:

Values in the Translation Control Register: 

IS =  0, TIA =  7, TIB =  12, TIC &  TID =  0, PS =  8 KByte 

Logical address without ET descriptor: 

BitNr. 31 ... 24 ... 

Pointer to Table A  Pointer to Table B 

12... o 

Address within the 

memory page

Logical address with ET descriptor in Table A: 

BitNr. 31... 24... 12... o 

Pointer to Table A          Page number in 32 Meg Address within the 

memory page block An ET descriptor can also replace more than one level of tables if it occurs at a  higher (previous) level of the translation tree. You can imagine this as a  tree, where the root pointer is the trunk, the tables of the intermediate levels are the limbs and branches, and the page descriptors at the lowest (last) level are the leaves. An ET descriptor replaces, a branch or limb with a  single "hyper-dimensional" leaf, which represents all the leaves this branch or limb carries.

Indirect Descriptors 

Another special feature of the translation tree, whose structure has 

already been described, is the indirect descriptor. This descriptor occurs in place of a  page descriptor at the lowest level of the translation tree and must point to a  page descriptor in some other branch of the tree. It allows two different logical addresses to be assigned to the same physical page. This would apply to global data structures or when the tree is divided into supervisor and user sections. The same effect is achieved simply by placing the same page address into two page descriptors at different parts of the tree. But in this case, the
Used and Modified bits of both descriptors must always be checked to 

determine whether the page has been accessed. Indirect descriptors can provide significant time savings in the case of global data structures, where not just two, but a  multiplicity of descriptors may point to the same physical address, since these structures can be accessed by every task. The MMU Instructions The MMU, like every coprocessor in a  68030 system, adds its own commands to the instruction set of the CPU. The MMU recognizes the following instructions:

IPMQVE 

The PMOVE instruction accesses the registers of the MMU: TC, SRP,
CRP.TTOorTTl. 

Syntax: PMOVE <effective address (ea)>, MMU-register 

PMOVE MMU-register,<ea> 

PMOVEFD Since changing the contents of an MMU- 

register usually invalidates the current values in the
ATC (Address Translation Cache), the ATC is cleared 

with every PMOVE instruction that writes to one of these registers. This can be prevented with PMOVEFD
(Flush Disable). 

Syntax: PMOVEFD <ea>, MMU-register 

IPFLUSH 

Clears an entry in the ATC. 

Syntax: PFLUSH(An) 

IPFLUSHA | 

Clears all entries in the ATC. 

Syntax: PFLUSHA 

PLOAD 

Performs a  table search for the given logical address and function code 

and writes the physical address to the ATC. The search can be performed in advance for routines where time is critical. The PLOAD instruction has two variants: PLOADR (read) and PLOADW
(write). In PLOADW, the MMU sets the Modified bit in the page 

desciptor, as though a  write access to this logical address had occurred. The Used bit is always set in PLOAD instructions.

Syntax: PLOADR <function code>,<ea> 

PLOADW <function code>,<ea> 

PTEST 

The PTEST instruction can be used to find the cause of a  bus error in the exception handler. The MMU performs a  table search for the logical address (this can be fetched from the stack after a  bus error), and sets the bits in the Status Register (see the following) to indicate whether an invalid descriptor was found, a  LIMIT exceeded, etc.

Syntax: PTEST <function code>,<ea>,level,An 

"level" is the maximum number of table levels which 

are to be searched. level=0 -  look only in ATC level=7 -  search all table levels

PTEST also has two variants, PTESTR and PTESTW. 

The distinction is pertinent only when PTEST level =  0, and one of the two transparent addresses (TTx registers) is referenced. The MMU Status Register (MMUSR)

BitNr. 

Name 

B -  Hardware bus error in table search 

L -  LIMIT error (invalid for PTEST level 0) 

S -  Supervisor only (invalid for PTEST level 0) 

Must be zero 

W -  Write protected 

I -  Invalid 

M -  Modified 

8&7 

Must be zero 

T -  Transparent region (only for PTEST level 0) 

5-3 

Must be zero 

2-0 

Number of table levels searched (0 with PTEST level 0) 

For PTEST with level =  0, the I  bit signals that the desired logical address has no ATC entry (in which case, a  level 7  PTEST will return additional information), or that a  hardware bus error has occurred in searching the table (in which case the B  bit also is set). For PTEST with level >  0, the I  bit indicates that an invalid descriptor was found, a  LIMIT was exceeded (L bit =  1), or a  bus error occurred (B bit =
1). 

### 11.2.2 The Floating Point Coprocessor

The microprocessor in a  desktop computer like the A3000 is normally responsible for the execution of all program instructions. But even the
68030, one of the most powerful processors, has its limits, namely in the 

processing of data types that are not directly supported in its hardware design.

Attempts must be made, then, to construct these from other available data 

types and handle their processing by using software. The data types that the 68030 supports directly were listed in the previous chapter. An example of one that is not directly supported, but which nevertheless can be effectively handled with the existing types, is. the character string. This usually consists of a  variable-length sequence of bytes terminated by a  zero. Using a  small loop and the "byte" data type, it is possible to perform all the elementary character string operations, such as copying, comparing and clearing.

Another data type not directly supported, and even more essential in the 

Amiga than the character string, is the bit-map graphic. Bit-map graphics 

are used to build a  representation in memory of the visible contents of a screen. Elementary bit-map operations, such as drawing lines or filling surfaces, require multiple operations with individual memory bits.
Unfortunately, the bit-by-bit manipulation of data is not very effective in 

a processor optimized for 32 bit integers. For this reason, Commodore has equipped the Amiga with an integrated circuit called the Blitter. While not an actual coprocessor in Motorola's sense of the word, it can perform independent bit-map operations much faster than the 68000.

Functions 

The FPU now places data types unknown to the 68030 but indispensable for a  variety of computer applications. These are the floating-point numbers. The 68030 recognizes only a  limited range of integer numbers, which can be expressed in mathematical set notation as follows: Z  = {X I  -231 <= X
< 231 }  xnis set 0f numbers may suffice for the normal tasks of an 

operating system and many application programs, but for the solution of mathematical problems it must be expanded. The drawing of a  circle presents a  simple example. The formula for a  point on the circumference is:

< 

X-coordinate =  sin angle *  radius 

Y-coordinate =  cos angle *  radius 

The final result, the point's "x:" and "y" coordinates, must be whole numbers, since there is no such thing as half a  pixel position in graphic memory. But computations with the trigonometric sine and cosine functions require a  greater universe than whole numbers, since these functions return values from the set of real numbers. The real numbers, when expressed in decimal form, have a  fractional component that either terminates, repeats periodically or repeats at random. A binary format, that can represent the greatest possible subset of these numbers, must be found. We are at best limited to a  subset, because any machine format is finite (i.e., limited to a  certain number of places). The limitations imposed on our available universe are twofold, affecting both range and precision. First, there is a  minimum and a  maximum number that the format can represent. Secondly, the fractional digits of repeating decimal numbers (e.g., pi) must eventually (as justified by considerations of memory and computing time) be truncated.

Over time, the floating-point representation has gained general 

acceptance, since it is applied relatively simply to computers and it is adequate for almost all mathematical computations.

Floating-point format corresponds to exponential notation in 

mathematics, where a  number greater than or equal to 1  and less than 10, called the mantissa (the decimal part of a  logarithm), is multiplied by a power of 10, the exponent. Some examples are:

Normal notation 

Exponential notation 

1,500,000 

0.5 

0.0000042 

->2.7 

->1.5 

->5 

->4.2 

A 

Mantissa 

10-1 

10-6 

A 

Exponent 

The exponent in floating-point machine format always refers to base 2. This notation permits the representation of both very large and very small numbers without long strings of zeros. The FPU 68881/68882 can perform computations on these numbers directly, just as the 68030 does with integers.

Internal Design -  The Program Model 

From the programmer's point of view, the FPU has 11 registers (see the following illustration). Eight of them are universal floating-point data registers, designated FP0 -  FP7. Each is 80 bits wide and can accept one number. In addition to these are the Control Register (FPCR), which controls the FPU's mode of operation, the Status Register (FPSR), which holds flag bits like its counterpart in the 68030, and the Instruction

//. The A3000 Hardware 

Address Register (FPIAR). This last register stores the address of the 

current FPU instruction, for reasons that will be seen later.

Ifcxceplion I      Mode I 

Enable |     Control I 

I Condnion |  Qlloti.rt I  Exceplion I    Accrued I 

| Code |  wmm |     Status |  Exception I 

J 

FPO 

FP1 

FP2 

FP3 

FP4 

FPS 

FP6 

FP7 

FPCR 

FPSR 

FPIAR 

Floating Point 

Data Registers 

Status 

Register 

Instruction Address 

Register 

Floating-point Data Format 

Floating-point Data Formats 

Internally the FPU operates exclusively on a  single data type called 

extended real. This is the only data type that can be placed in one of the
FPU data registers. It is, however, only one of seven types with which we 

may actually work. All others are automatically converted by the FPU to extended real format before being used. When a  value is transferred from one of the eight FPU data registers to main memory, the corresponding conversion again takes place. The byte, word, and longword integer formats are identical to those of the 68030, but are also handled internally as extended.

Single real and double real formats differ only in size, with one long word 

for single and two for double. Extended real format consists of three long words, but 16 bits are not used, since the FPU data registers are only 80 bits wide.

Packed decimal real format differs from the other six formats in that it 

represents numbers by the base-ten (decimal) rather than base-two
(binary) system. 

The mantissa undergoes special handling in single and double real formats. Basically all floating-point numbers are stored in normalized form. This means that the exponent is chose to produce a  mantissa in the range 10° <= mantissa <  10* (1 <= mantissa <  10). One writes not 35 *
103 but 3.5 *  10*, and 5  * 10'4 instead of 0.5 *  10"3. There is exactly 

one place before the decimal point, whose position is established in all formats. m

8-BIT 

EXP. 

23-BIT 

FRACTION 

SIGN OF FRACTION 

11-BIT 

EXP. 

L 

52-BIT 

FRACTION 

SIGN OF FRACTION 

14-BIT 

EXPONENT 

ZERO 

64-BIT 

MANTISSA 

SIGN OF MANTISSA 

80 67 

IT 

IMPLICIT BINARY POINT 

I 3-DK3IT 

' EXP. 

17-DIGIT : 

MANTISSA : 

DOUBLE REAL 

EXTENDED REAL 

PACKED DECIMAL REAL 

I — IMPLICIT DECIMAL POINT 

■2 BITS. USED ONLY FOR t  INFINITY OR NANS, ZERO OTHERWISE 

.SIGN OF EXPONENT 

■—SIGN OF MANTISSA 

UNLESS A  BINARY-TO-DECIMAL CONVERSION OVERFLOW OCCURS 

Real Formats 

Similarly, a  mantissa in the binary system would be governed as follows: 

2° <= mantissa <  21 (1 <= mantissa <  2). The bit before the "decimal
point must always be 1. To save space, it is simply dropped in single and double format. The first bit of the mantissa represents the first place after the "decimal" point, with a  leading 1  always implied. In extended format this bit still exists and can be set to zero. The same is true of packed decimal format. Such a  number is said to be unnormalized. It is normalized by the FPU before any operation on it is begun. The result of an FPU instruction is never an unnormalized number. The exponent (except in packed decimal format) is constructed as an unsigned binary number, from which the sign is then reclaimed by subtracting an offset. Depending on the format, the offset is 127, 1023 or
16383. For a  number in double real format, for example, the value 1023 in 

the exponent field signifies an actual exponent value of 0, 1022 is -1, and so on. The reason for this lies in the 68030. By virtue of this special representation of the exponent and the fact that the mantissa sign appears in the MSB of the long word, two floating-point numbers can be compared by the CMP instruction, without having to call upon the FPU. For this purpose they behave just like normal integers.

Status and Control Registers 

The Status Register is subdivided into four function groups of one byte each:

• Condition Code Byte 

• Quotient Byte 

• Exception Byte 

• Accrued Exception Byte 

Condition Code Byte (FPCC -  Floating Point Condition Code) 

BitNr.: 

Function: 

N 

NAN 

N 

NAN 

Negative result 

Result is 0 

Result is +  or -  infinity 

Result is not a  number 

These four bits fulfill the same purposes as the N, C, Z  and X  bits in the
Status Register of the 68030. They are set according to the data type of 

the result following every computation operation. With the aid of these bits, you can use the FBcc instruction to build conditional jumps into a program, making program flow dependent upon FPU computation results.

Quotient Byte 

BitNr.: 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 

Function: S      MSB Quotient LSB 

This byte is set after only two instructions: modulo and IEEE-REST.
Both compute the remainder of a  division. Instead of throwing away the 

inner of a  computed quotient, it is placed in this byte. If it is greater than seven bits, the higher order ones are dropped. The sign of the quotient appears in the S  bit.

Exception Byte 

BitNr.: 

15 14 13 12 11 10 

9 8 

Func: 

BSUN SNAN OPERR OVFL UNFL D

INEX1 INEX2 

BSUN 

Branch /  Set On Unordered 

SNAN 

Signaling Not A  Number 

OPERR 

OPerand ERRor 

OVFL 

OVerFLow 

UNFL 

UNderFLow 

D

Divide by Zero 

INEX2 

INEXact Operation 

INEX1 

INEXact decimal input 

Just as the 68030 calls an exception routine in case of error, for example, 

a supervisor instruction executed in user mode, the same can be done by the coprocessor. In fact, computations with floating-point numbers can cause several types of errors. These errors are reflected in the Exception byte.

Whether an exception routine will actually be called depends on the 

upper byte of the Control Register, the Exception Enable byte. It has exactly the same layout as the Exception byte in the Status Register. If a bit in the Enable byte is set and the corresponding exception occurs, the
68030 calls the assigned exception routine. If an exception is disabled 

by clearing the corresponding bit, checking the Exception byte will reveal whether an error has occurred, but the exception procedure will not be called.

Accrued Exception Byte 

BitNr.: 7  6 5  4 3 

Function: IOP OVFL UVFL DZ INEX 

IOP 

OVFL 

UNFL 

D

INEX 

Invalid OPeration (BSUN or SNAN or OPERR) 

OVerFLow (OVFL) 

UNderFLow (UNFL and INEX2) 

Divide by Zero (DZ) 

INEXact Operation (INEX1 or INEX2 or OVFL) 

Sometimes you may prefer simply not to permit any exceptions, if for no 

other reason than to avoid having to program the exception handlers. In this case the Exception byte would have to be checked after every floating-point computation, since any bits set are cleared for each new operation. Here the Accrued Exception byte is useful. If the FPU changes a  bit in the Exception byte, the bits in the Accrued byte are set as previously shown. Thus IOP is activated when BSUN, SNAN or OPERR =  1 .

Unlike in the Exception byte, the bits in the Accrued byte retain then- 

status. Once set, they are cleared only by the explicit writing of a  0 in the
Status Register. 

This allows you to perform a  series of computations and wait until their completion to determine whether any errors occurred.

Control Register -  Mode Control Byte 

BitNr.: 

6 5            4 3           2 

Function: 

PREC 

RND 0           0 

PREC 

Rounding Precision 

Extended 

Single 

Double 

RND -  Rounding Mode 

round to nearest -  RN round toward zero -  R round toward minus infinity -  RM

1 1 

round toward plus infinity -  RP

Precision bits are used to adjust the precision to which a  result should be 

rounded. Normally these bits are set to Extended (both 0), since internal processing takes place on extended numbers. A  result stored in single or double precision is rounded automatically, regardless of the PREC bits. The rounding mode determines what the coprocessor will do when a number cannot be represented exactly with the available precision.
Internally it computes with three additional bits for the mantissa. If these 

are not all zero as the result of a  computation, rounding is required. The actual value lies between two choices, which are numbers that can be represented with the available number of bits in the mantissa. One of these must be chosen as the result. How the FPU proceeds in this choice is determined by the two RND bits:

Mode RN always rounds to the nearer of the two possibilities previously 

described. If they are equidistant, the FPU chooses the even one (LSB =
0). 

Mode RZ rounds to the one with the smaller absolute value (i.e., the one 

closer to zero).

Mode RM always chooses the smaller number, RP chooses the larger. 

The FPU Instruction Set As we mentioned earlier, all FPU assembler instructions are simply considered extensions of the 68030 instruction set and can be mixed with 68030 instructions as desired. Processing occurs in parallel. A  main processor instruction that follows an FPU instruction can begin executing as soon as the 68030 has given the FPU the data it needs.
Only upon encountering another FPU instruction must the CPU wait for 

the first one to be completed. The only exceptions are those FPU instructions that transfer data from the FPU to main memory. Here the 68030 must wait until the 68881 has finished making the data available. The syntax of the instructions follows the same rules already familiar to the 68000 series processors. By now most assemblers on the Amiga can process 68030 and 68881 instructions.

//. The A3000 Hardware 

All FPU instructions begin with the letter "F" (as all PMMU instructions begin with "P"), to distinguish them from those of the main processor. The registers are designated as follows:

• FPO -  FP7 for the eight floating-point data registers 

FPCR, FPSR and FPIAR for the control registers (in general FPcr) 

The following abbreviations are valid for the various data types:

.B, .W, .L 

for byte, word or long word integer

.S, .D 

for single or double precision real

X for extended precision real 

•P for packed decimal 

All the same addressing modes can be used as for the 68030, except in the few instructions that permit only certain kinds of addressing. The syntax is also the same.

Data Transfer Instructions 

Instruction Syntax 

Operand Format 

Operand 

Operation 

FMOVE 

FPmm.FPn 

Source->dest 

<ea>,FPn 

B.W.L.S.D.X.P 

FPm,<ea> 

B.W.L.S.D.X 

FPm,<ea>(#k) 

P 

FPm,<ea>(Dn) 

P 

<ea>,FPcr 

L 

FPcr,<ea> 

L 

FMOVECR 

#ccc,FPn 

ROM constant -> FPn 

FMOVEM 

<ea>,<list> 

L,X 

Register list -> dest 

<ea>,Dn 

<list>,<ea> 

ux

Source -> register list 

Dn,<ea> 

Remarks: 

The FMOVE instruction with .P (packed decimal) as the destination format can automatically round to a  desired number of places. The rounding value, which can be supplied immediately or in a  data register, is specified as follows:

-64 <= k  <= 0        Rounded to Ikl places after the decimal point 

0 <  k <= 17 Mantissa is rounded to k  places independent of the 

exponent In the FMOVECR instruction, "ccc' constant from the ROM of the FPU: is the number of a  numerical

Number 

Constant 

$00 

PI 

$0B 

Log ! 0(2) 

$oc 

e

$0D 

Log2(e) 

$0E 

Log10(e) 

$0F 

0.0 

$30 

ln(2)

$31 

ln(10)

$32 

10° 

to

101,102, 104, . 

. 102048 

$3F 

104096 

MOVEM transfers any combination of the eight data registers or one of 

the three control registers between memory and the FPU. If the list is in a processor data register, only a  data register transfer is possible. The following format applies:

Type of addressing 

Predecrement -(An) 

All others

Bit 7 

FP7 

FP0 

■-- 

BitO 

FP0 

FP7 

Dyadic Operations 

Dyadic operations are functions performed on two operands, for example 

multiplication or addition. The first operand can be addressed with any addressing method, the second must always be one of the FPU data registers. The result of the function will be placed in this data register.

Instruction 

Function 

FADD 

Add 

FCMP 

FDIV 

Compare 

Divide 

FMOD 

Modulo 

FMUL 

FREM 

Multiply 

IEEE remainder 

FSCALE 

FSGLDIV 

FSGLMUL 

FSUB 

Exponent scaling 

Divide (single precision) 

Multiply (single precision) 

Subtract 

Remarks: 

FSCALE adds the first value (whose fractional places are truncated) to 

the exponent of the second.

FREM delivers the remainder of a  division according to the IEEE- 

definition:

IN I  (Operandi /  Operandi) rounded with 'round-to-nearest'! 

Operand2 -  (Operandi *  X) 

Monadic Operations 

A monadic operation is a  function performed on a  single operand. The operand can be referenced with any addressing method. The result is always placed in an FPU data register.

Instruction 

Function 

FABS 

Absolute value 

FACOS 

Arccosine 

FASIN 

Arcsine 

FATAN 

Arctangent 

FATANH 

Hyperbolic arctangent 

FCOS 

Cosine 

FCOSH 

Hyperbolic cosine 

FETOX 

e to the x

FETOXM1 

e to the x-1

FGETEXP 

Get exponent 

FGETMAN 

Get mantissa 

FINT 

Integer 

FINTR

Integer round to zero 

FLOGN 

Logarithm of (x) 

FLOGNP1 

Logarithm of (x+1 ) 

FLOG10 

Log base 1 0 of x 

FLOG2 

Log base 2  of x 

FNEG 

Negate 

FSIN 

Sine 

FSINH 

Hyperbolic sine 

FSQRT 

Square root 

FTAN 

Tangent 

FTANH 

Hyperbolic tangent 

FTENTOX 

10Ax 

FTWOTOX 

2Ax 

Instruction Syntax 

Format

Instruction 

FSINCOS 

<ea>,FPc:FPs 

FPm,FPc:FPs 

B.W.L.S.D.X.P 

SIN(source) -> FPs 

COS(source) -> FPc 

Remarks: 

FSINCOS produces two results, which are placed in separate data 

registers. The unit of measurement of angles in trigonometric functions is the radian.

Program Control Instructions 

This group of instructions allows control of program flow by using condition codes generated by the FPU. Their functions correspond to the
68030 instructions of the same name. 

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Operand Format/Size 

Operation 

FBcc 

<Label> 

W,L 

If true, then PC+d->PC

FDBcc 

Dn,<Label> 

W 

If true, then no operation, else Dn-1-
>Dn If Dn o  -1 then 

PC+d->PC 

FNOP 

None 

None 

No operation 

FScc 

<ea> 

B 

If true, then 1's->dest else 0's->dest

FTST 

<ea> 

B,W,L,S,D,X,P 

FPSR Set cond.codes 

FPn 

The following mnemonics can be given for "cc": With Exception (NAN bit set in Status Register):

GE 

greater or equal

GL 

greater or less

GLE 

greater, less or equal

GT 

greater

LE 

less or equal

LT 

less

NGE 

not (greater or equal)

NGL 

not (greater or less)

NGLE 

not (greater, less or equal)

NGT 

not (greater)

NLE 

not (less or equal)

NLT 

not less

SEQ 

equal

SNE 

unequal

SF 

always false

ST 

always true Without Exception:

OGE 

ordered and greater or equal

OGL 

ordered and greater or less

OR 

ordered

OGT 

ordered and greater

OLE 

ordered and less or equal

OLT 

ordered less

UGE 

unordered or greater or equal

UEQ 

unordered or equal

UN 

unordered

UGT 

unordered or greater

ULE 

unordered or less or equal

ULT 

unordered or less

EQ 

equal

NE 

unequal

F 

always false

T 

always true This list may seem confusing if you're used to the 68030 condition codes.
What does ordered mean? Why is there a  distinction between "greater or 

less" and "unequal"? The reason is that a  floating-point number can represent two special conditions that a  normal number cannot:

1 . +  or -  infinity 

2. not-a-number (NAN) 

A number with all l's in the exponent and all 0's in the mantissa represents an infinity. The sign bit remains valid, so there are both plus and minus infinities. An infinity is produced when the exponent of a  result is greater than or equal to the greatest possible exponent that can be represented. An invalid number (not-a-number) occurs when the exponent is all l's and the mantissa is not all 0's. This can arise through a  number of invalid operations, such as applying the square root function to a  negative number or dividing two infinities. A NAN can also be used to signal user-defined exception conditions. This is the purpose of the SNAN exception (signaling Not-A-Number), which occurs when a  function is called with a  "signaling" NAN as an operand. This intentionally supplied NAN is identified by a  zero bit in the first fractional position of the mantissa. If the FPU produces a  NAN as the result of a  computation, it sets this bit, even if it was called with a signaling NAN (assuming the SNAN exception has been disabled). The NAN presents a  few problems in the handling of condition codes.
Whereas plus infinity can be said to be greater than any natural number, 

this concept of comparison is not possible with a  NAN. Is the number 1 greater or less than a  NAN? There is no answer to this question. For this reason, in addition to greater, less and equal, the conditions ordered and unordered have been introduced. The unordered condition applies when the NAN bit in the Condition Code Register is set. All comparisons testing for greater or less check the NAN bit. If it is set, the first number is neither greater nor less than the second. Moreover, the numbers are not equal, either. Rather, they are unordered, and this is the only condition that will test true in such a  case.

Only the conditions equal and not equal (EQ and NE) function the same 

as they do for integers in the 68030.

So that an additional branch instruction is not required to intercept the 

NAN condition, the 68881 has a  built-in BSUN exception. If you use one 

of the instructions from the previous first list and allow this exception, the 68030 executes the exception procedure as soon as the NAN bit is set at the branch. An important reminder: "not less" doesn't always mean "greater" it could mean "unordered".

System Control Instructions 

This group consists of only three instructions:

FSAVE and FRESTORE cause the operating system to save and restore 

the internal state of the FPU and are mainly used when switching between two tasks, both of which want FPU access. An FSAVE and subsequent MOVEM for all 11 registers preserves the momentary state of the FPU entirely, even if it was interrupted in the middle of a  computation. (In this case the FSAVE transfers 184 bytes.)
Any other FPU operation can now be allowed to execute, until, by means 

of the reverse MOVEM and FRESTORE, the FPU is restored to its earlier state and can resume the interrupted computation. With FTRAPcc an exception can be generated regardless of condition code. A  word or long word given with the FTRAPcc instruction is considered to be surrendered to the trap handler and will not be handled by the processor.

Instruction 

Operand Syntax 

Operand Size 

Operation 

FRESTORE 

<ea> 

None 

State frame -> internal 

register

FSAVE 

<ea> 

None 

Internal register -> state 

frame

FTRAPcc 

None 

None 

If condition true, then exception

#xxx 

W,L 

The FPU Exceptions As previously mentioned, there are eight exception types that can be generated by the FPU:

BSUN 

Branch /  Set On Unordered 

SNAN 

Signaling Not A  Number 

OPERR 

OPerand ERRor 

OVFL 

OVerFLow 

UNFL 

UNderFLow 

D

Divide by Zero 

INEX2 

INEXact Operation 

INEX1 

INEXact decimal input 

BSUN has the highest priority and INEX2/1 the lowest priority. If 

multiple exceptions occur simultaneously, the 68030 executes the one with the highest priority, and the trap handler must worry about whether lower priority bits are also set. The individual FPU exceptions are assigned to the following TRAP vectors on the 68030:

Vector Number 

Vector Offset 

Assignment 

$01C 

FTRAPcc instruction 

$02C 

F-Line emulator 

$034 

Protocol violation 

$0C0 

BSUN 

$0C4 

Inexact result 

$0C8 

Divide by zero 

$0CC 

Underflow 

$0D0 

Operand error 

$0D4 

Overflow 

$0D8 

SNAN 

FTRAPcc This exception is called if condition cc is valid on an 

FTRAP instruction. 

F-Line 

Cop.Prot. 

BSUN 

INEX 

This exception indicates that an invalid FPU instruction was detected. The bit pattern of the current instruction does not match any known instruction. A protocol violation in the communication between main and coprocessor generates this exception. The cause is usually a  hardware defect. As described in the last section, this exception occurs on certain branch conditions (also FTRAPcc, etc.), when the NAN bit in the Condition Code Register is set. The
NAN bit must be reset within the trap routine, because 

at the conclusion of exception handling the FPU calls the instruction again. There are two potential generators of an Inexact Result
Exception: INEX1 is produced when a  packed decimal 

number is converted internally to extended precision format.

INEX2 

D

Indicates the need for rounding in all other 

circumstances. All operations resulting in periodic or nonteiminating binary numbers produce this exception. A Divide-by-zero occurs upon dividing a  number by zero or calling a  transcendental function that has a perpendicular asymptote at this position, so that F(X) goes to infinity (e.g., tan(PI/2)). If this exception is disabled, the FPU returns an infinity result.

UNFL 

OPERR 

The Underflow exception is called when the result of a computation is too small to be represented internally, meaning the exponent is less than or equal to the least possible value. It also occurs when a  MOVE instruction converts an operand from extended precision to single or double, and the exponent is less than or equal to the least possible value.

Conversion to .B, .W or .L format does not cause an 

Underflow exception, but simply returns a  zero value. 

Despite the trap, in all Underflows, either the least 

possible result or zero is returned, depending on rounding mode.

Operand Error refers to a  variety of possible error 

conditions arising from the use of mathematical functions with inappropriate input or in a  context that does not have a  valid mathematical interpretation.
Square root of a  negative number is an example of such 

a condition.

OVFL 

SNAN 

The same conditions apply to the Overflow exception as to Underflow, except that it is activated by the greatest possible exponent, and returns infinity or the greatest possible result, again depending on the rounding mode. This exception is called when an operand of a  monadic or dyadic function is a  signaling NAN.

Because the main processor and the math coprocessor work in parallel, 

the FPU exceptions are not recognized by the 68030 until it has already processed subsequent instructions and arrived at the next FPU command. A  trap handler whose job is to redress an FPU error would like to know which instruction caused it. But the 68030 has already gone ahead in the program, and the last address it has placed on the stack is the next FPU instruction. Between this and the one that caused the exception is an unknown number of normal processor instructions. The FPIAR Register (Floating Point Instruction Address Register) is designed to take care of this problem. It holds the address of the FPU instruction that the coprocessor is currently processing. If an exception occurs, the trap handler only needs to read the address from the FPIAR
Register to find the offending instruction in main memory. 

### 11.2.3 Differences Between the MC 68881 and

68882 

The essential difference between the two floating-point coprocessors is in the manufacturing technology. Whereas the maximum cycle rate for the 68881 was 20 MHz, the fastest version of the 68882 manages 50
MHz. But the 68882's advantage in speed results not only from a  higher 

cycle frequency. Even at the same frequency it runs 25% faster than the
'881. This effect is linked to the improved facility for parallel processing. 

Both coprocessors have only a  single APU, and can perform only one 

floating-point computation at a  time. The fetching of new operands and conversion of numeric formats runs parallel to the work of the APU. Here's an example of programming that maximizes the efficiency of the
68882: 

When the following loop:

FMOVE.X (A0),EP1 

FADD.X (A1),FP1 

FMOVE.X FP1, (A2) 

Fetch next entry 

Add 

Store 

is optimized for the 68882 it looks like this:

FMOVE.X (A0),FP1 

FMOVE.X (A3),FP2 

FADD.X (A1),FP1 

FADD.X (A4),FP2 

FADD.X FP1, (A2) 

FMOVE.X FP2, (A3) 

Fetch next entry 

Fetch next +  1 

First add 

Add next +  1 

Store first result 

Store next +1 

This simple example shows how the placement of instructions within a loop can help alleviate register conflict. To do this, try to combine the fastest FMOVE's with the fastest arithmetic instructions, and the slowest FMOVE's with the slowest arithmetic instructions.

### 11.2.4 Cache Memory

The 68030 has two internal caches: 256 bytes each for instructions and data. Their function is to store frequently used values and make them available to the CPU without wait time on subsequent references. This solves the problem of designing a  main memory that is both large and fast. Because of caching, sufficient speed is attained with less expensive dynamic RAM, so you don't have to skimp on memory size.

RAM access requires wait cycles, which inevitably results in wasting 

some of the maximum processor speed. But wait time can be significantly reduced by reading a  large part of the data and instructions from main memory only the first time they are referenced and then reading them from cache memory. Depending on the program, efficiency increases of up to 100% are possible. The caching concept exploits the fact that, during program processing, the CPU spends most of its time in loops of no more than 10 to 30 instructions. Once such a  loop has executed the first time, it is fully contained in the instruction cache and need not be read again from main memory. This principle also applies to data. The most frequently referenced addresses tend to be localized. For example, if you look at a  typical C program, you'll see that within a  function, most data accesses refer to the local variables, which are placed on the stack in a  single block.

Instruction Cache Design 

Each cache in the 68030 consists of 16 rows, each of which contains four long words. Each row is assigned a  tag-entry, in which the address
(bits 8  - 31) and the FC2 bit of the function code (for distinguishing 

between supervisor and user mode) is placed. The tag-entry also contains four Valid bits, for the four long words.

Address bits 4-7 select the cache row, and bits 2  and 3  select one of the 

long words. When the CPU accesses main memory, a  row is selected by the appropriate address bits and the row's tag-entry is compared with address bits 8  - 31 and the FC2 bit. If they agree, and if the Valid bit for the desired long word is set, the condition is called a  cache-hit. In this case, the value can be read from the cache and RAM is not accessed. A cache-miss occurs when the tag and address do not agree or the Valid bit is zero. If just the Valid bit is missing, the CPU reads the value from main memory, transfers it to the cache and sets the Valid bit. If there was no tag-entry agreement, the CPU tries not only to retrieve the desired long word from
RAM, but also to fill the entire row. A  burst-fill is started for this purpose. 

The burst-fill takes advantage of the fact that the four long words occupy consecutive addresses in memory. A  special access method of dynamic RAM enables extremely fast referencing of sequential data. A burst-fill for four long words barely takes longer than two normal accesses. After a  successful burst, the address is entered to the tag-field and all four
Valid bits are set. Accessing this data again results in a  cache-hit. 

Function of Address bits in Cache: 

Address 

Function 

A0&A1 

Byte within long word 

A2&A3 

Long word within row 

A4-A7 

Row number 

A8 -  A31 

Address of data in corresponding row 

&FC2 

(stored in tag-entry of row) 

Cache Row Layout: 

Tag (FC2.A31 -  A8)|Longword 0|Longword 1|Longword 2|Lw3 

The data Cache The data cache differs from the instruction cache in its additional requirement for write access. Write access is not relevant to instruction caching, since instructions are not altered. Also, data cache tag-entries contain all three function code bits because the data and program regions must be distinguished.

Basically the data cache is designed as a  write-through cache. This 

means that all data is written to main memory, regardless of whether or not it is present in the cache. Thus values in RAM are always valid.

Two modes are available for transferring written data to the cache: with 

or without Write Allocation (WA). Without Write Allocation, a  value is transferred to the cache only when it was already found there (i.e., when a cache-hit occurred). The new value replaces the old, without any change to the tag-entry or Valid bits. In this mode, values with new tag- addresses are written to the cache only on read accesses. With Write Allocation, all data is transferred, regardless of whether a cache-hit or a  cache-miss occurred. A  miss clears the Valid bits of the remaining three long words. WA mode is necessary if both supervisor and user access are permitted at the same address, as is the case in the
Amiga. The following example should help illustrate the problem without 

Write Allocation: 

• The supervisor reads Value A  at Location X, and A  is loaded to the 

cache.

• The user program writes Value B  to Location X. Since the cache 

distinguishes user from supervisor access, no hit occurs despite the same address. B  is not transferred to the cache, but remains at
Location X. 

• The supervisor reads Location X  again, but getting a  hit, it reads it 

from the cache. It reads the wrong value (A instead of B). The Cache Control Registers (CACR and CAAR)

Two registers control the functioning of both caches. The Cache Control 

Register (CACR) contains several control bits, while the Cache Address 

Register (CAAR) specifies the address of a  long word in the cache. This 

address is necessary for clearing individual entries in the cache. The
CAAR layout corresponds to the addressing of the individual cache 

entries in normal operation:

Cache Address Register (CAAR) 

BitNr.: 

31 ...8 

7 ... 4               3 and 2 

1 andO 

Function: 

| Unused 

| Cache row |  Long word 

| Unused 

Cache Control Register (CACR) 

BitNr.: 

Name: 

Function: 

31 -14 

— 

Unused 

WA 

Write Allocate 

DBE 

Data Burst Enable 

CD 

Clear Data Cache 

CED 

Clear Entry in Data Cache 

FD 

Freeze Data Cache 

ED 

Enable Data Cache 

7-5 

— 

Unused 

IBE 

Instruction Burst Enable 

CI 

Clear Instruction Cache 

CEI 

Clear Entry in Instruction Cache 

Fl 

Freeze Instruction Cache 

El 

Enable Instruction Cache 

WA Write Allocation mode is turned on if this bit is set. 

DBE Enables burst on cache-miss with wrong tag-entry. 

CD All entries in the data cache are cleared when a  1 is written to 

this bit. This only happens once the CD bit is not stored.

CED Clears only the cache-entry whose address is in the CAAR. 

FD Freezes the data cache. Subsequent read accesses without 

cache-hits do not overwrite old values. Cache contents are modified by write accesses only. The FD bit is useful for optimizing program speed. It prevents one-time accesses (for which the cache provides no speed advantage) from destroying useful values in the cache.

ED The processor ignores a  cache-hit if the Enable bit is cleared. 

All data is retrieved from main memory. The cache contents continue to be updated and can be used as soon as caching is enabled.

IBE Enables burst access for instruction cache. 

CI Clears all instruction cache entries. 

CEC Clears the entry whose address is in the CAAR. 

FI If the FI bit is set, the contents of the instruction cache cease 

to be updated.

EI If the EI bit is zero, a  cache-hit is ignored and all instructions 

are fetched from main memory.
