# Interrupts

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

### 11.7.3 Interrupts

Almost all the I/O components of the custom chips and the two CIAs can 

generate an interrupt. A  special circuit inside Paula manages the interrupt sources and creates the interrupt signals for the 68030. The processor's autovector interrupts, levels 0  to 6, are used for this. No provision is made for the non-maskable interrupt (NMI), level 7. The two registers involved are the interrupt request register (INTREQ) and the interrupt mask
(enable) register (INTENA). The assignment of the bits in the two 

registers is identical.

Interrupt enable and interrupt request register layout 

INTREQ 

INTREQR 

INTENA 

INTENAR 

= $09C (write) 

= $01E(read) 

= $09A (write) 

= $01C(read) 

Bit 

Name 

IE 

Function 

SET/CLR 

Write/read (see DMACON register) 

INTEN 

(6) 

Enable interrupts 

EXTER 

Interrupt from CIA-B or expansion port 

DSKSYN 

Disk sync value recognized 

RBF 

Serial port receive buffer full 

AUD3 

Output audio data channel 3 

AUD2 

Output audio data channel 2 

AUDI 

Output audio data channel 1 

AUDO 

Output audio data channel 0 

BUT 

Blitter ready 

VERTB 

Start of vertical blanking gap reached 

COPER 

Reserved for Copper interrupts 

PORTS 

Interrupt from CIA-A or expansion port 

SOFT 

Reserved for software interrupts 

DSKBLK 

Disk DMA transfer ended 

TBE 

Serial transmit buffer empty 

The lower 13 bits represent the individual interrupt sources. The CIA interrupts are combined into a  single interrupt. The bits in the DMAREQ register indicate which interrupts have occurred. A  bit is set if the corresponding interrupt has occurred. In order to generate a  processor interrupt, the corresponding bit must be set in the DMAENA register and the INTEN bit must also be set. The INTEN bit acts as the main switch for the remaining 14 interrupt sources, which can be turned on and off with the individual bits of the INTENA register. Only when INTEN is 1  can any interrupts be generated. If both the INTEN bit and the two corresponding bits in the INTENA and
INTREQ registers are set, a  processor interrupt is generated. 

//. The A3000 Hardware 

The corresponding autovector numbers are listed in the IL (Interrupt
Level) column in the table. Here are the addresses of the seven interrupt 

auto vectors:

Vector no. 

Address 

Autovector level 

100/$64+(VBR) 

Autovector level 1 

104/$68+(VBR) 

Autovector level 2 

108/$6C+(VBR) 

Autovector level 3 

112/$70+(VBR) 

Autovector level 4 

116/$74+(VBR) 

Autovector level 5 

120/$78+(VBR) 

Autovector level 6 

(31 

124/$7C+(VBR) 

Autovector level 7) 

VBR =  Vector Base Register (see section on 68030) 

As you can see, the interrupts that require faster processing are given higher interrupt levels. To change the bits in these two registers, you must work with a  SET/CLR bit using the same procedure described for the DMACON register. After processing an interrupt, the processor must reset the INTREQ register bit that generated it. In contrast to the interrupt control registers of the CIAs, the bits in the INTREQ register are not automatically cleared on reading.

Setting a  bit in the INTREQ register with a  MOVE command has the 

same effect as if the corresponding interrupt had occurred. This is how a software interrupt is created, for example (SOFT, bit 2). The Copper can also create its own interrupt by writing into INTREQ.

One peculiarity is bit 14 in the INTREQ register, which has no specific 

function there as it does in INTENA. But when it is set by writing to
INTREQ, and ENTEN in the INTENA register is high, a  level 6  interrupt is 

generated. On each interrupt from CIA-A, bit 3  in the DMAREQ register is set. For
CIA-B this is bit 13. The interrupt source in the corresponding CIA must 

be determined by reading the interrupt control register of the CIA.
Interrupts 3  and 13 can also be generated by expansion cards on the 

expansion port.

Interrupt bit 5  indicates the vertical blanking interrupt. This occurs at the 

start of each video frame at the start of the vertical blanking gap (line 0), and SO times per second. The remaining interrupts are discussed in the appropriate sections.
