# ECS Capabilities

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

### 11.7.7 ECS Capabilities

The features previously described (with the exception of the 2  Meg chip
RAM) were already present in the custom chips of the A1000. But in the 

course of the A3000's development, an improved chip set, called the
Enhanced Chip Set (ECS), was also developed. To ensure software- 

compatibility, the developers did not change anything in the programming of previously existing modes. However, some new registers have been added for utilizing the additional capabilities of the new chips:

Super-HiRes mode 

In this mode the horizontal resolution is doubled from 640 to 1280 pixels/line.

Freely programmable screen display 

The geometry of the generated video image can be freely programmed by selecting, not only the number of pixels per line, but also the number of lines and the video frequency. With Super-HiRes mode, a  flicker-free picture can be produced even at a  resolution of 640 x  512 pixels.

Larger bit-planes 

The Blitter now supports bit-planes up to 32768 x  32768 pixels in size.

Expanded genlock capabilities 

Through a  modified "chromakey" scheme, every video register can 

control the video overlay.

Super-HiRes mode 

Previously there were two possibilities for horizontal resolution: HiRes 

(high resolution) and LoRes (low resolution). In LoRes mode a  pixel had 

a duration of 140 nanoseconds (ns), in HiRes mode 70 ns. The new
Super-HiRes mode gives double the resolution of HiRes mode, with a 

duration of 35 ns per pixel. To achieve this, Agnus must read twice as much data per bit-plane from the chip RAM. The maximum possible number of bit-planes has been halved to only two, representing a maximum of four colors in the Super-HiRes mode.

Unfortunately, the entire palette of 4096 colors is not accessible in the 

Super-HiRes mode. Only 64 colors are possible, with two bit each for the 

red, green and blue components. The programming of the color registers for this mode follows a  rather complicated scheme, which is illustrated below.

B 

Bit-plane (color 0): 

Bit-plane (color 1): 

Bit-plane (color 2): 

Bit-plane (color 3): 

ab- gh~ mn- st- cd- ij- op~

UV-- 

ef- kl- qr- wx-

BIT 15 14 13 12 11 

c

00 .... A 

B 

A 

B 

C 

D 

C 

D 

E 

F 

E 

F 

G 

H 

A 

B 

J 

C 

D 

K 

L 

E 

F 

L 

M 

N 

A 

B 

o

P 

C 

D 

Q 

R 

E 

F 

S 

T 

A 

B 

u

C 

D 

W 

E 

F 

R 

A 

B 

G 

H 

c

D 

J 

E 

F 

K 

L 

G 

H 

G 

H 

J 

J 

K 

L 

K 

L 

R 

M 

N 

G 

H 

P 

J 

Q 

R 

K 

L 

E 

S 

T 

G 

H 

u

J 

W 

K 

L 

G 

A 

B 

M 

N 

c

D 

P 

E 

F 

Q 

R 

G 

H 

M 

N 

J 

P 

K 

L 

Q 

R 

S 

0A 

M 

N 

M 

N 

P 

o

P 

Q 

R 

Q 

R 

T 

0B 

S 

T 

M 

N 

u

P 

W 

Q 

R 

E 

OC 

A 

B 

S 

T 

c

D 

u

E 

F 

W 

R 

0D 

G 

H 

S 

T 

J 

u

K 

L 

W 

0E 

M 

N 

S 

T 

P 

u

Q 

R 

W 

OF 

S 

T 

S 

T 

u u

W 

W 

The following shows the color selection scheme for sprites, which are subject to the same limitations as the playfields in Super-HiRes mode.

Color selection for Super-HiRes sprites 

B 

Sprite (color 16): 

Sprite (color 17) : 

Sprite (color 18): 

Sprite (color 1 9) : 

AB- 

GH-- 

MN- 

ST-- 

CD-- 

IJ-- 

OP-- 

UV-- 

EF-- 

KL-- 

QR- 

WX- 

BIT 15 14 13 12 11 

c

10 .... A 

B 

A 

B 

C 

D 

C 

D 

E 

F 

E 

F 

G 

H 

A 

B 

J 

C 

D 

K 

L 

E 

F 

L 

M 

N 

A 

B 

P 

C 

D 

Q 

R 

E 

F 

S 

T 

A 

B 

u

C 

D 

W 

E 

F 

R 

A 

B 

G 

H 

c

D 

J 

E 

F 

K 

L 

G 

H 

G 

H 

J 

J 

K 

L 

K 

L 

R 

M 

N 

G 

H 

P 

J 

Q 

R 

K 

L 

E 

S 

T 

G 

H 

u

J 

W 

K 

L 

G 

A 

B 

M 

N 

c

D 

P 

E 

F 

Q 

R 

G 

H 

M 

N 

J 

o

P 

K 

L 

Q 

R 

S 

1A 

M 

N 

M 

N 

P 

P 

Q 

R 

Q 

R 

T 

1B 

S 

T 

M 

N 

u

P 

W 

Q 

R 

E 

1C 

A 

B 

S 

T 

c

D 

u

E 

F 

W 

R 

1D 

G 

H 

S 

T 

J 

u

K 

L 

W 

1E 

M 

N 

S 

T 

P 

u

Q 

R 

W 

1F 

S 

T 

S 

T 

u u

W 

W 

Although the Super-HiRes mode allows fewer colors than lower resolutions, it does enable a  more precise positioning of sprites. An additional bit for the horizontal position in the second control word of the sprite data list (bit 4) allows positioning of sprites at a  resolution of
70 nanoseconds (i.e., two Super-HiRes pixels). 

The Super-HiRes mode is enabled with bit 6  of the first bit-plane control register, BPLCON0. The bit for normal HiRes mode (bit 15) must also be cleared.

Programmable geometry of the video image 

Previously, a  computer conformed to either the PAL or the NTSC video 

standard, and the geometry of the computer's video image (i.e., the number of lines on a  screen and the number of pixels in a  line) was fixed accordingly. With the Agnus chip of the A3000 the geometry of the image can be freely programmed. You can switch between the two standards or, with the new Super-HiRes mode, even create new formats. For example, under Kickstart 2.0, there is a  productivity mode capable of producing a  non-interlaced display of 640 x  480 pixels (computed without overscan).

Some new registers were introduced to achieve this flexibility: 

HTOTAL $1C0 (write-only) Number of cycles per line 

Bit 

Function 

5 14 13 12 11 10 9       8 7        6 5       4 

h8 n7 h6 h5 h4 h3 h2 hi The duration of each line is the number of clock cycles in HTOTAL +  1, the clock being the color clock CCK (3.54 MHz, with a  280 ns period). For a  normal Pal image, this number would be 227.S, for the productivity mode 114. The number of lines is placed in the VTOTAL register.

VTOTAL $1C8 (write-only) Highest line displayed 

There are a  total of VTOTAL +  1 lines displayed per image. The previous two registers are used to establish the geometry of the video image. The following new registers determine the exact timing of the creation of the horizontal and vertical synchronization signals and of the blanking signals:

$1E0 

$1CA 

$1DE 

$1C2 

$1E2 

$1C4 

$1C6 

$1CC 

$1CE 

VSSTART 

VSSTOP 

HSSTART 

HSSTOP 

HCENTER 

HBSTART 

HBSTOP 

VBSTART 

VBSTOP 

Starting line of vertical sync signal 

Ending line of vertical sync signal 

Starting column of horizontal sync signal 

Ending column of horizontal sync signal 

Starting column of vertical sync in interlace mode 

Starting column of horizontal blanking signal (HBLANK) 

Ending column of horizontal blanking signal (HBLANK) 

Starting line of vertical blanking signal (VBLANK) 

Ending line of vertical blanking signal (VBLANK) 

In connection with all the new registers, there is an additional register,
BEAMCON0, which indicates how they are to be used: 

BEAMCONO $1DC (write-only) 

Bit 

Name 

Function 

HARDDIS 

Disable normal blanking signal 

LPENDIS 

Disable lightpen 

VARVBEN 

Activate VBSTART/STOP registers 

LOLDIS 

Disable 227/228 cycle/line switching 

CSCBEN 

Enable composite-sync bypass 

VARVSYEN 

Enable variable V-sync 

VARHSYEN 

Enable variable H-sync 

VARBEAM 

Activate HTOTAL/VTOTAL registers 

DUAL 

Special Ultra-HiRes mode (not implemented) 

PAL 

Switch Agnus to PAL 

VARCSYNC 

Enable variable composite-sync 

BLANKEN 

Output blanking signal <!to/on?!> composite-sync pin 

CSYTRUE 

Composite sync active-high 

VSYTRUE 

Vertical sync active-high 

HSYTRUE 

Horizontal sync active-high 

A further change in the ECS chip set affects the definition of the screen window. With the new DIWHIGH register, the window can now be changed. The DIWHIGH register is activated by setting it after writing the desired values to the old DIWSTRT and DIWSTOP registers:

DIWHIGH $1E4 (write only) 

Bit 

Name 

Function 

... 

... 

H8 

Horizontal stop, high-value bit 

... 

... 

V10 

V9 

Vertical stop, three high-value bits 

V8 

— 

... 

H8 

Horizontal start, high-value bit 

V10 

V9 

Vertical start, three high-value bits 

V8 

