# The CIA 8520

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

## 11.3 The CIA 8520

The 8520 CIA

GND-»C 

1 V           J 40 

2 V_^ 39 

^**CNT 

?MM-tC

3*»SP 

PA1. .1 

3 38 

Z3*-A0 

„,-,. .i 

4 37 

Z3«-A1 

mil rf*~

5 36I3«-A2 

PA4*-»cn 

6 35 

=1— £?_ 

PA5«-»^ 

7 Q                  34 

8 >-* 33 

3*-RES 

pa6«-»c:

^•**D0 

PA7**^ 

9 r\J 32 

10 >>* 31 

Z3-**D1 

PB0«-»C

^♦-»D2 

PB1«-H

11 I/} 30 

12 **-J 29 

13 CO 28 

1« ID3 

PB2«-»^

:3«-»D4 

PB3<-»C

Z3**DS 

PB4**C

14 ^^ 27 

^3«-»D6 

PB5*-*Ci: 

15 26 

^♦*D7 

pb6»-*c^

16 25 

:ZJ«-*2_[Phi 21 

PB7»*ca 

17 24 

Z3«-FLAO 

PC *-C

18 23 

^*-CS_ 

TOD-*^ 

19 22 

^«— R/W 

Vcc-^d] 

20 21 

3Z3— *IR0 

Note: The arrows show the direction of the signal. 

A line above a  signal names means the signal is active when low (0 =  active).

77i<? CM S520 

The 8520 is a  peripheral component of the Complex Interface Adapter
(CIA) class, which basically means that its developers tried to support as 

many functions as possible on a  single chip. A  close inspection of the
8520 reveals great similarity to its old counterpart in the C64, namely the 

6526. Only the functioning of registers 8  through 11 has changed 

slightly. This is certainly good news for anyone familiar with programming the 6526. The 8520 has the following features: two freely programmable 8-bit parallel ports (PA and PB), two 16-bit timers (A and B), a  bi-directional serial port (SP) and a  24-bit counter (event counter) with an alarm function upon reaching a  programmed value. All functions can generate interrupts. The functions of the 8520 are organized into 16 registers. To the processor they look like ordinary memory locations, since all peripheral components in a  68 x  0 system are memory mapped and can be read and written with the usual MOVEs and other processor instructions. The 16 internal registers are selected with the four address-inputs, A0-A3.
Details about the integration of the CIA into the Amiga system are found 

at the end of this section. The following are the functions of the 16 registers (actually 15, since register 1 1 ($B) is unused): The 8520 registers

Register 

Name 

Function 

PRA 

Port A  data register 

PRB 

Port B  data register 

DDRA 

Port A  data direction register 

DDRB 

Port B  data direction register 

TALO 

Timer A  lower 8  bits 

TAHI 

Timer A  upper 8  bits 

TBLO 

Timer B  lower 8  bits 

TBHI 

Timer B  upper 8  bits 

Event low 

Counter bits 0-7 

Event mid 

Counter bits 8-1 5 

A 

Event high 

Counter bits 16-23 

B 

— 

Unused 

C 

SP 

Serial port data register 

D 

ICR 

Interrupt control register 

E 

CRA 

Control register A 

F 

CRB 

Control register B 

The parallel ports

Register 

Name 

D7 

D6 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

PRA 

PRB 

DDRA 

DDRB 

PA7 

PB7 

DPA7 

DPB7 

PAS 

PB6 

DPA6 

DPB6 

PA5 

PB5 

DPA5 

DPB5 

PA4 

B4 

DPA4 

DPB4 

PA3 

PB3 

DPA3 

DPB3 

PA2 

PB2 

DPA2 

DPB2 

PA1 

PB1 

DPA1 

DPB1 

PAO 

PBO 

DPAO 

DPBO 

The 8520 has two 8-bit parallel ports, PA and PB, each of which is assigned a  data register, PRA (Port Register A) and PRB (Port Register
B). Associated with these registers are the chip's 16 port lines, PA0-PA7 

and PB0-PB7. The 8520 allows the data direction of each port line to be individually controlled. This means that each port line can be used as input as well as output. For this purpose, each port has a  data direction register, DDRA and DDRB. If a  bit in a  data direction register is 0, its corresponding line behaves as input, so that the level of the signal on this line can be interrogated by reading the appropriate bit of the data register.

If the bit is set to 1 , the line becomes an output. Now the signal on the line is actually determined by the value of the corresponding bit in the data register. In general, writing to a  data register always stores the value in it, while reading always returns the states of the port lines. The bits in the data direction register determine whether the value of the data register is placed on the port lines. Therefore when reading a  port that is configured as an output, the contents of the data register are returned, while when writing to an input port, the value is stored in the data register, but does not appear on the port lines until the port is configured as output.

8520 -  block diagram 

SP 

CNT 

TOD 

IRQ 

SP buffer 

Serial port 

CNT buffer 

— *\ TOD buffer"[- * 

D0-D7 

§ 

I Databus buffer I 

Event/ 

Alarm 

FLAG buffer 

IRQ buffer 

±± 

INT/mask 

Um 

PRA 

DDRA 

PA buffer 

xy

PAO 

PA7 

PC buffer 

DDRB 

PB buffer 

,rik 

Timer B      5 

CRA 

Timer A 

CRA 

o

PBO 

PB7 

8520 access control 

R/W $2 CS A3 A2 Al AO RES 

Key: 

I | 

= 8-bit line 

= 1 -bit line 

Block Diagram of the 8520 CIA 

To simplify data transfer through the parallel ports, the 8520 has two handshake lines, PC and FLAG. The PC output goes low for one clock cycle on each access to data register B  (PRB, reg. 1). The FLAG input responds to such downward transitions. Every time the state of the FLAG line changes from 1  to 0, the
FLAG bit is set in the Interrupt Control Register (ICR, reg. $D). These 

11 .3 The CIA 8520 

two lines allow a  simple form of handshaking in which the FLAG and PC lines of two CIAs are cross-connected. The sender need only write its data to the port register and then wait for a FLAG signal before sending each additional byte. Since FLAG can generate an interrupt, the sender can even perform other tasks while it is waiting. The same applies to the receiver, except that it reads the data from the port instead of writing it. The timers:

Read access: 

Register 

Name 

D7 

DS 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

TALO 

TAHI 

TBLO 

TBHI 

TAL7 

TAH7 

TBL7 

TBH7 

TAL6 

TAH6 

TBL6 

TBH6 

TAL5 

TAH5 

TBL5 

TBH5 

TAL4 

TAH4 

TBL4 

TBH4 

TAL3 

TAH3 

TBL3 

TBH3 

TAL2 

TAH2 

TBL2 

TBH2 

TAL1 

TAH1 

TBL1 

TBH1 

TALO 

TAHO 

TBLO 

TBHO 

Write access: 

Register 

Name 

D7 

D6 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

PALO 

PAHl 

PBLO 

PBHI 

PAL7 

PAH7 

PBL7 

PBH7 

PAL6 

PAH6 

PBL6 

PBH6 

PAL5 

PAH5 

PBL5 

PBH5 

PAL4 

PAH4 

PBL4 

PBH4 

PAL3 

PAH3 

PBL3 

PBH3 

PAL2 

PAH2 

PBL2 

PBH2 

PAL1 

PAH1 

PBL1 

PBH1 

PALO 

PAHO 

PBLO 

PBHO 

The 8520 has two 16-bit timers. These timers can count from a  preset value down to zero. A  number of modes are possible and can be selected through a  control register, one for each timer (CRA and CRB). Each timer consists internally of four registers (timer A: TALO+TAHI and
PALO+PAHI), or two register pairs, since each low and high register pair 

forms the 16-bit timer value. Both register pairs have the same address, but one can only be read and the other only written. On a  write access to one of the timer registers the value is first saved in a  latch, then loaded into the timer register and decremented until the timer reaches zero. When this happens, the value is loaded from the latch into the timer register again.

Reading a  timer register returns the current state of the timer. To get a 

correct value, though, the timer must be stopped. The following example shows why:

Timer state: $0100. 

• A  read access to register 5  returns the high byte of the current state: 

$01. 

Before the low byte (reg. 4) can be read, the timer is decremented
again and the timer state is now $00FF. 

The low byte is read: $FF.

Resulting timer state: $01FF. 

• Instead of stopping the timer, which also causes problems since now 

timer pulses are ignored, a  better method can be used: Read the high byte, then the low byte and then the high byte again. If the two high byte values match, then the value read is correct. If not, the process must be repeated.

• Which signals decrement the timers is determined for timer A  by bit 

5 and for timer B  by bits 5  and 6  of the respective control registers. 

Only two sources are possible for timer A: 

1. Timer A  is decremented with each clock cycle. The cycle frequency 

of the CIAs in the Amiga is 716 KHz (INMODE =  0).

2. Timer A  is decremented with each high impulse on the CNT line 

(INMODE =  1). 

Timer B  has four input modes: 

1. Clock cycles (INMODE bits =  00) (binary -  the first digit stands for 

bit 6, the second for bit 5).

2. CNT impulse (INMODE bits =  01). 

3. Timer A  timeouts (allows two timers to form a  32-bit timer) 

(INMODE bits =  10). 

4. Timer A  timeouts when the CNT line is high (allows the length of a 

pulse on the CNT line to be measured) (INMODE bits =  11). The timeouts of a  timer are registered in the Interrupt Control Register
(ICR). When timer A  times out, the TA bit (no. 0) is set, while when timer 

B times out, the TB bit (no. 1) is set. These bits, like all of the bits in the 

ICR, remain set until the ICR is read. 

113 The CIA 8520 

In addition, it is also possible to output the timeouts to parallel port B. If the PBon bit is set in the control register for the given timer (CRA or
CRB), then each timeout appears on the appropriate port line (PB6 for 

timer A  and PB7 for timer B).

Two output modes can be selected with the OUTMODE bit: 

OUTMODE =  0 Pulse mode 

Each timeout appears as a  positive pulse one clock period long on the corresponding port line.

OUTMODE =  1 Toggle mode 

Each timeout causes the corresponding port line to change value from high to low or low to high. Each time the timer is started the output starts at high. The timers are started and stopped with the START bit in the control registers. START =  0 stops the timer, START =  1 starts it. The RUNMODE bit selects between one-shot mode and continuous mode. In one-shot mode the timer stops after each timeout and sets the
START bit back to 0. In continuous mode the timer restarts after each 

timeout. As mentioned before, writing to a  timer register doesn't write the value directly to the register but to a  latch (also called a  prescaler, since the number of timeouts per second is equal to the clock frequency divided by the value in the prescaler). There are several ways to transfer the value from the latch to the timer:

1. Set the LOAD bit in the control register. This causes a  forced load, 

that is, the value in the latch is transferred to the timer registers regardless of the timer state. The LOAD bit is called a  strobe bit, which means that the bit is not stored but simply triggers a  one-time operation. To cause another forced load, a  1 must be written to the
LOAD bit again. 

2. Each time the timer runs out, it is automatically reloaded with the 

value in the latch.

3. After a  write access to the high register of a  timer that is stopped 

(START =  0), the timer is automatically loaded with the value in the 

latch. Therefore the low byte of the timer should always be initialized first.

Assignment of the bits in control register A: 

Register No. 14/$E Name: CRA 

D7 D6 D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

not

SPMODE 

INMUDfc 

LOAD 

RUNMODE 

OUT MODE 

PBon 

yiAHl used

0=input 

0=clock 

1=force 

0=cont. 

0=pulse 

0=PB6off 

0=off | 

1=output 

1=CNT 

load
(strobe) 

"None- 

shot

1=toggle 

1=PB6on 

1=on 

Assignment of the bits in control register B: 

Register No. 15/$F Name: CRB 

D7 D6+D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

ALARM 

INMODE 

LOAD 

RUNMODE 

OUTMODE 

PBon 

START 

0=TOD 

00=clock 

1=force 

0=cont. 

0=pulse 

0=PB7off 

0=off 

1=alarm 

01=CNT 

10=timerA 

11=timerA+ 

CNT 

load
(strobe) 

None- 

shot

1=toggle 

1=PB7on 

1=on 

The event counter:

Register 

8 $8 

Name 

LSB event 

Event 8-15 

MSB event 

"D7- 

T7~ 

E15 

E23 

T3B~ 

"EB- 

E14 

E22 

TJ5 D4" D3~ 

"E5~
E13 

E21 

"E4- 

E12 

E20 

-E3~ 

E11 

E19 

"D2- 

"E2- 

E10 

E18 

ur

"ET- 

E9 

E17 

TJrJ — | 

"ED- 

E8 

E16 

As we mentioned earlier, there are only minor differences between the
8520 and the 6526. All of these differences concern the function of 

registers 8-11. The 6526 has a  real-time clock which returns the time of day in hours, minutes and seconds in the individual registers. On the
8520 this clock is replaced by a  simple 24-bit counter, called an event 

counter. This can lead to some confusion, because Commodore often uses the old designation TOD (Time-Of-Day) when referring to the 8520. The operation of the event counter is simple. It is a  24-bit counter, meaning that it can count from 0  to 16777215 ($FFFFFF). With each rising edge (transition from low to high) on the TOD line, the counter value is incremented by one. When the counter has reached $FFFFFF, it starts over at 0  on the next count pulse. The counter can be set to a defined state by writing the desired value into the counter registers.

Register 8  contains bits 0-7 of the counter, the least significant byte 

(LSB), in register 9  are bits 8-15, and in register 10 are bits 16-23, the 

most significant byte (MSB) of the counter. The counter stops on each write access so that no errors result from a sudden carry from one register to another (as described in the timer discussion). The counter starts running again when a  value is written into the LSB (reg. 8). Normally the counter is written in the order: register 10
(MSB), then register 9, and finally register 8  (LSB). 

To prevent carry errors when the counter is read, the counter value is written into a  latch when the MSB (reg. 10) is read. Each additional access to a  count register now returns the value of the latch, which can be read in peace while the counter continues to run internally. The latch is turned off again when the LSB is read. The counter should be read in the same order as it is written (see previous paragraph). An alarm function is also built into the event counter. If the alarm bit (bit
7) is set to 1  in control register B, an alarm value can be set by writing 

registers 8-10. As soon as the value of the counter matches this alarm value, the alarm bit in the interrupt control register is set. The alarm value can only be set -  a read access to registers 8-10 always returns the current counter state, regardless of whether or not the alarm bit is set in control register B. The serial port

Register Name D7 D6 D5 D4 D3 D2 PI "W 

12 $C |  SDR |  57 |  56 |  55 |  54 |  53 |  S2 |  S1 |  SO 

The serial port consists of the serial data register and an 8-bit shift register that cannot be accessed directly. The port can be configured as input
(SPMODE=0) or output (SPMODE=l) with the SPMODE bit in control 

register A. In the input mode the serial data on the SP line are shifted into the shift register on each rising edge on the CNT line. After eight CNT pulses the shift register is full and its contents are transferred to the serial data register. At the same time, the SP bit in the interrupt control register is set. If more CNT pulses occur, the data continues to shift into the shift register until it is full again. If the user has read the serial data register
(SDR) in the meantime, the new value is copied into the SDR and the 

transfer continues in this manner. To use the serial port as output, set SPMODE to 1. The timeout rate of timer A, which must be operated in continuous mode, determines the baud rate (number of bits per second). The data are always shifted out of the shift register at half the timeout rate of timer A, so the maximum output rate is one quarter of the clock frequency of the 8520.

Transfer begins after the first data byte is written to the SDR. The CIA 

transfers the data byte into the shift register. The individual data bits now appear on the SP line at half the timeout rate of timer A, as the clock signal from timer A  is reflected in the CNT line. (CNT changes value on each timeout on every falling edge, that is, high to low transition on the
CNT line, the next bit appears on the SP line.) 

The transfer begins with the MSB of the data byte. Once all eight bits have been output, CNT remains high and the SP line retains the value of the last bit sent. In addition, the SP bit in the interrupt control register is set to show that the shift register can be supplied with new data. If the next data byte was loaded into the data register before the output of the last bit, the data output continues without interruption. To keep the transfer continuous, the serial data register must be supplied with new data at the proper time. The SP and CNT lines are open- collector outputs so that CNT and SP lines of multiple 8520s can be connected together. The Interrupt Control Register (ICR):

Read access =  data register 

Register Name D7 D5 D5 D4 D3 D2 DT DO

13 $D I  ICR |  IR |  0 |  0 |  FLAG |  SP |  Alarm |   IB |  TA' 

Write access =  mask register 

Register Name t>7 D6 D5 D?~ D3 D2 D1 DC 

Register Name u/ D6 us D4 D5 D2 DT DO-! 

13 $U I  ICR |  S/C I  x |  x |  FLAG |  SP I  Alarm |    IB |  TA~ I 

The ICR consists of a  data register and a  mask register. Each of the five interrupt sources can set its corresponding bit in the data register. Here again are all five possible interrupt sources:

1. Timeout of timer A  (TA, bit 0). 

2. Timeout of timer B  (TB, bit 1). 

3. Match of event counter value and alarm value (Alarm, bit 2). 

4. The shift register of the serial port is full (input) or empty (output) 

(SP,bit3). 

5. Negative transition on the FLAG input (FLAG, bit 4). 

If the ICR register is read, what is returned is always the value of the data register, which is subsequently cleared (all set bits, including the IR bit are cleared). If the value of the data register is still needed, it must be stored in RAM after the read. The mask register can only be written. Its value determines whether a  set bit in the data register can generate an interrupt. To make an interrupt possible, the corresponding bit in the mask register must be set to 1. The
8520 pulls the IRQ line low (it is active low) whenever a  bit is set in both 

the data register and the mask register and sets the IR bit (bit 7) in the data register so that an interrupt is also signaled in software. The IRQ line does not return to 1  until the ICR is read and thus cleared. The mask register cannot be written like an ordinary memory location. To set a  bit in the mask register, the desired bit must be set and the S/C bit
(Set/Clear, bit 7) must also be set. All other bits remain unchanged. To 

clear a  bit, the desired bit must again be set, but this time the S/C bit is cleared. The S/C bit determines whether the set bits will set (S/C=l) or clear (S/C=0) the corresponding bits in the mask register. All cleared bits in the byte written to the mask register have no effect on it. Here is an example: We want to allow an interrupt through the FLAG line. The current value of the mask register is 0000001 1 binary, meaning that both timer interrupts are allowed. The following value must be written into the mask register: 10010000 binary (S/C =1). The mask register then has the following contents:
00010011. 

If you now want to turn the two timer interrupts off, write the following value: 00000011 (S/C=0). Now the mask register contains 00010000, and only the FLAG interrupt is allowed.

Integration of the CIAs into the Amiga system 

As previously mentioned, the Amiga has two CIAs of the type 8520. The base address of the first 8520, which we call 8520-A, is $BFE001. The registers are not at contiguous memory addresses, however. Instead they are at 256 byte intervals. This means that all of the 8520-A registers are at odd addresses because the 8520-A is connected to the lower 8  lines of the processor data bus
(DO-7). Between the 68030 and the CIAs is a  bus adapter. This forms the 

68000-style synchronous bus interface. Originally this transfer protocol 

from the 8-bit (6800) era was implemented in the 68000 for compatibility with the peripheral ICs that existed at that time. As the dramatic success of the 68000 became apparent, special ICs for its asynchronous bus were made available, and the synchronous bus was dropped from the later processors (68020, 30 and 40). The special logic of the bus adapter allows the CIAs from older Amigas, which were also retained for compatibility, to be connected to the 68030 bus. The following table lists the addresses of the individual registers with their uses in the Amiga (refer to the section on interfaces for more information on the individual port bits):

CI A- A: Register addresses 

Address 

Name 

u/ U6 D5 D4 D3 D2

D1 

DO 

$BFE001 

PRA 

/FIR1 /FIHO /RDY /TKO /WPHO /CHNG 

/LED 

OVL 

$BFE101 

PRB 

Centronics parallel port 

$BFE201 

DDRA 

0 0              0 0             0 0 

$BFE301 

DDRB 

Input or output depending on the application 

$BFE401 

TALO 

Timer A  is used by the operating system for communication 

$BFE501 

TAHI 

with the keyboard

$BFE601 

TBLO 

Timer B  is used by the OS for various tasks 

$BFE701 

TBHI 

$BFE801 

E. LSB 

The event counter in CIA-A counts 50 Hz

$BFE901 

$BFEA01 

E.8-15 

pulses from the power supply (called ticks), which are taken from the power-line frequency

E. MSB 

$BFEC01 

SP 

Input for key codes from the keyboard 

$BFED01 

ICR 

Interrupt control register 

$BFEE01 

CRA 

Control register A 

$BFEF01 

CRB 

Control register B 

The second CIA, CIA-B, is referenced at address $BFD000. Its registers lie at even addresses because the data bus of CIA-B is connected to the upper half of the processor data bus.

C1A-B: Register addresses 

Address 

Name 

D/ D6 D5 D4 D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

$BFDOOO 

PRA 

/DTR /RTS /CD yCTS /DSR 

SEL 

POUI 

BUSY 

$BFD100 

PRB 

/MTR /SEL3 /SEL2 /SEL1 /SELO 

/SIDE 

DIR 

/STEP 

$BFD200 

DDRA 

110 0             0 

$BFD300 

DDRB 

11111 

$BFD400 

TALO 

Timer A  is used only for serial data transfer 

$BFD500 

TAHI 

otherwise it is free

$BFD600 

TBLO 

Timer B  is used to synchronize the blitter with the 

screen

$BFD700 

TBHI 

otherwise it is free

$BFD800 

E. LSB 

The event counter in CIA-B counts the

$BFD900 

E.8-15 

horizontal sync pulses

$BFDA00 

E. MSB 

1 5625 per second (PAL standard) 

$BFDC00 

SP 

Unused 

$BFDD00 

ICR 

Interrupt control register 

$BFDEOO 

CRA 

Control register A 

$BFDF00 

CRB 

Control register B 

The following list shows the various signal lines of the Amiga's CIAs:
C1A-A 

/IRQ 

/INT2 input from Paula 

/RES 

System reset line 

D0-D7 

Processor data bus bits 0-7 

A0-A3 

Processor address bus bits 8-1 1 

Phi2 

CIA clock input (71 6 kHz) 

R/W 

Processor R/W 

PA7 

Game port 1  pin 6  (fire button) 

PA6 

Game port 0  pin 6  (fire button) 

PA5 

/RDY "disk ready" signal from disk drive 

PA4 

/TKO "disk track 00" signal from disk drive 

PA3 

/WPRO "write protect" signal from disk drive 

PA2 

/CHNG "disk change" signal from disk drive 

PA1 

LED Control over the power LED (0 =  on, 1  = off) 

PAO 

OVL Memory overlay bit (do not change!) 

SP 

KDAT Serial keyboard data j 

CNT 

KCLK Clock for keyboard data 

PB0-PB7 

Centronics port data lines 

PC 

/DRDY Centronics handshake signal: data ready 

FLAG 

/ACK Centronics handshake signal: data acknowledge 

CIA-B 

/IRQ 

/INT6 input from Paula 

/RES 

System reset line 

D0-D7 

Processor data bus bits 8-15 

A0-A3 

Processor address bus bits 8-1 1 

Phi2 

CIA clock input (716 kHz) 

R/W 

Processor R/W 

PA7 

/DTR Serial interface, /DTR signal 

PA6 

/RTS Serial interface, /RTS signal 

PA5 

/CD Serial interface, /CD signal 

PA4 

/CTS Serial interface, /CTS signal 

PA3 

/DSR Serial interface, /DSR signal 

PA2 

SEL "select" signal for Centronics interface 

PA1 

POUT "paper out" signal from Centronics interface 

PAO 

BUSY "busy" signal from Centronics interface 

SP 

BUSY connected directly to PAO 

CNT 

POUT connected directly to PA1 

PB7 

/MTR "motor" signal to disk drive 

PB6 

/SEL3 "drive select" for drive 3 

PB5 

/SEL2 "drive select" for drive 2 

PB4 

/SEL1 "drive select" for drive 1 

PB3 

/SELO "drive select" for drive 0  (internal) 

PB2 

/SIDE "side select" signal to disk drive 

PB1 

D I R "direction" signal to disk drive 

PBO 

/STEP "step" signal to disk drive 

FLAG 

/INDEX "index" signal from disk drive 

PC 

Not used 

