# Sound Output

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

### 11.7.9 Sound Output

Fundamentals of electronic music 

All sounds, whether music, noise or speech, occur in the form of oscillations in the air these are the sound waves that reach our ears. A normal musical instrument creates these oscillations either directly, in which the air blown through it is made to oscillate (e.g., a  flute) or indirectly, where part of the instrument creates the tone (oscillation) and then the air picks it up (e.g., string instruments). An electronic instrument creates oscillations in its circuits that correspond to the desired sound. These oscillations aren't audible until they are converted to sound waves by a  loud-speaker. On the Amiga the speaker built into the monitor is normally used. Unfortunately, because of its size and quality, it is not capable of high-fidelity translation of the electrical oscillations into sound waves. Therefore, you should connect your Amiga to a  good amplifier/speaker system to get the full effect of its musical capabilities. What parameters determine the sound that comes from the computer?

//. The A3000 Hardware 

Frequency 

The first is the frequency of a  sound. It determines whether the pitch sounds high or low. The frequency is actually the number of oscillations per second, measured in Hertz (Hz). One oscillation per second is 1  Hz, and a  kilohertz is 1000 Hz. The human ear can discern sounds between
16 and 16000 Hz. Those who know something about music know that 

the standard A  has a  frequency of 440 Hz. The connection between frequency and pitch is as follows: With each octave the frequency doubles. The next higher A  has a  frequency of 880 Hz, while the A  on the octave below the standard has a  frequency of 220 Hz. The frequency of a  tone does not have to be constant. For example, it can periodically vary around the actual pitch by a  few Hz, creating an effect called vibrato.

Volume 

The second parameter of a  sound is its volume. By volume we mean the amplitude of the oscillation. The volume of a  sound is measured in deciBels (dB). The range of human hearing is about ldB to 120 dB. Each increase of about 10 dB doubles the audible volume. The volume of sound is also called sound pressure or intensity. The volume can be influenced by many parameters. The simplest is naturally the volume control on the monitor or amplifier. This simply changes the amplitude of the electrical oscillations. But the distance between the listener and the speaker also has an effect on the volume. The farther you are from the speaker, the softer the sound becomes. Also, the furnishings in the room, open or closed doors, etc. can also affect the amplitude of sound waves. Therefore, the absolute volume is not that important. More interesting is the relative volume of sounds between each other, such as whether a  sound is louder or softer then its predecessor. There is a  relationship between the volume of a  sound and its frequency. The cause of this is the sensitivity of the human ear. High and low sounds are perceived as being softer than those in the middle range, even if they physically have the same sound pressure in deciBels. This middle pitch range runs from about 1000 to 3000 Hz. The oscillations of human speech fall within this frequency range, which is probably the reason for the higher sensitivity. The volume of a  sound can also change periodically within a  given range. This effect is called tremolo. However, there is the variation in volume from the start to the end of a  sound. A  sound can start out loud and then slowly die out. It can also start out loud, then drop a  certain amount and stop abruptly. Or it starts softly and then slowly becomes louder. There are almost no limits to the possible combinations here.

Tone color or timbre 

The third and last parameter of a  sound is somewhat more complicated. This is the timbre or tone color, and it plays an important role. There are hundreds of different instruments which can all play a  sound with the same frequency and volume, but still they sound different from one another. The reason for this lies in the shape of the oscillation. The following figure shows four common waveforms. Why do they sound different? Each waveform, regardless of what it looks like, can be represented as a mix of sine waves of different frequencies having a  fixed relationship to each other. For a  square wave, the first wave (or harmonic) has the fundamental frequency of the sound, the second harmonic has three times the fundamental frequency but only a  third of the amplitude. The third harmonic has five times the frequency but a  fifth of the amplitude, and so on.

Sine 

Square 

Triangle 

Sawtooth 

Noise 

Waveforms 

The next figure shows this for a  square wave and a  sawtooth wave. For the sake of simplicity only the first three harmonics of each waveform are shown. As we said, all periodic waveforms can be represented as sums of sine waves. This is called the harmonic series of a  sound. The pure sine wave consists only of the fundamental frequency. A  square wave consists of an infinite number of harmonics. The number of harmonics and their frequency and amplitude relationship determine the timbre of a  sound. The harmonic series is important because the human ear reacts only to sine waves. A  sound whose waveform deviates from a  pure sine wave is divided into its harmonics by the ear. You should keep these facts in mind when reading the following discussion.

3 combined sine waves make a  square wave 

v=sin X+ sin 3x £Jn_5x.
1 3  5 

.or a  sawtooth wave 

y=Sin X+ sin 2x sjn3x,
2 3 

Waveforms 

Noise 

In addition to pitched tones there are also noises. While you can define a tone very precisely and also create it electronically, this is much more difficult for noises. They have neither a  given frequency nor a  defined amplitude variation and no actual waveform. They represent an arbitrary combination of sound events. The basis of many noises is called white noise, which is a  mix of an infinite number of sounds whose frequencies and phases have no definite relationship to each other. The wind produces this sound, for example, because millions of air molecules are put into oscillation as they collide with one another or with objects on the earth's surface. These random oscillations make up an undefinable mixture of sounds we know as the rustling of wind.

Sound creation on the Amiga 

Digitizing a  waveform 

127 -■ 

-128- ► 

90 J  127 i  90 ,   0 I  -90 )   -127 '  -90 

49 117 117 49 -49 -117 -117 -49 

Digital waveforms 

The main criterion forjudging the acoustical capabilities of a  computer is its versatility. All three parameters of a  sound (i.e., frequency, volume and timbre) should be able to be adjusted independently. The Amiga's developers tried to achieve this goal as nearly as possible.
Not to be limited to predefined waveforms, the digital equivalent of the 

desired waveform is stored in memory and then converted to the corresponding electrical oscillation by a  digital-to-analog converter. In other words, the oscillation is digitized and stored in the computer.
During output, the digitized data is converted back to analog form and 

sent to the amplifier. In order to convert the waveforms to a  form understandable to the computer, their patterns must be represented by numbers. To do this, divide one cycle of the desired waveform into an even number of equal- sized sections. Begin as close as possible to a  point where the wave intersects the X  axis. For each of the sections, put the corresponding Y value into memory. This produces a  sequence of numbers whose elements represent snapshots of the wave at given points in time. These digitized values are called samples. On output, the Amiga converts the number values from memory back into the corresponding output voltages. But since the wave is divided into a  limited number of samples by the digitization, the output curve can be reconstructed only with this number of voltages. This results in the staircase form of the wave shown in the previous figure. The quality of sounds reproduced in this way as opposed to their original waveforms depends essentially on two quantities:

One is the resolution of the digitized signals. This is the value range of 

the samples. On the Amiga this is eight bits, or from -128 to +127. Each input value can take one of 256 possible values in memory. Since the resolution of analog signals is theoretically unlimited, but that of the individual samples is limited, conversion errors result. These are called quantization or rounding errors. When the input value lies somewhere between two numbers (it doesn't correspond exactly to one of the 256 digital steps), it is rounded up or down. The maximum possible quantization error is 1/256 of the digitized value (also called an error of 1
LSB). 

A factor called the quantization noise is tied to the quantization error. As the name indicates, this reveals itself as noise matching the magnitude of the quantization error. A value range of eight bits allows moderately good reproduction of the original wave. However, higher resolution is needed for high-fidelity reproduction. For example, a  CD player works with 16 bits. The second parameter for the quality of digitized sound is the sampling rate. This is the number of samples per second. Naturally, a  higher number of samples results in better reproduction. The sampling rate can be set within certain bounds on the Amiga. First you must consider how many samples are used per digitized cycle of the waveform. In our example this is 16 values. There is little audible difference between the resulting staircase waveform and a  normal sine signal. The output of the digitized sound

Once the desired waveform has been converted to the corresponding 

numbers and written into memory, you naturally want to hear it. The
Amiga has four sound channels, which all work according to the 

following principle: A digitized wave is read from memory through DMA and output through a digital/analog converter. This process is repeated continually so that the single cycle of the waveform creates a  continuous tone. Channels 0 and 3  are sent to the left stereo channel, while 1  and 2  are sent to the right. Each audio channel has its own DMA channel. Since the DMA on the
Amiga is performed on words, two samples are combined into one data 

word. For this reason you always need an even number of samples. The upper half of the word (bits 8-15) is always output before the lower half
(bits 0-7). 

The data list for our digitized sound wave (where "Start" is the starting address of the list in chip RAM) looks as follows in memory:

Start : 

dc.b 0,49

 1st data word, 

samples

1 and 2 

dc.b 90,117

2nd data word. 

samples

3 and 4 

dc.b 127,117

3rd data word, 

samples

5 and 6 

dc.b 90,49

4th data word. 

samples

7 and 8 

dc.b 0,-49

5th data word, 

samples

9 and 10 

dc.b -90,-117

 6th data word. 

samples

11 and 12 

dc.b -127,-117

7th data word. 

samples

13 and 14 

dc.b -90,-49

8th data word. 

samples

15 and 16 

End: 

The digital/analog converter requires the samples to be stored as signed
8-bit numbers. In digital technology, they must appear in two's 

complement form. The assembler accomplishes this conversion for us, so the negative values can be written directly in the data list. Now you must select one of the four channels over which to output the tone. The corresponding DMA channel must then be initialized. Five registers per channel set the operating parameters. The first two form an address register pair, which you should recognize from the other DMA channels. They are called AUDxLCH and AUDxLCL, or together
AUDxLC, where x  is the number of the DMA channel: 

fceg.

Name 

Function 

$0A0 

AUDOLCH 

Pointer to the audio data 

Bits 16-20 

$0A2 

AUDOLCL 

for channel 0

Bits 0-15 

$0B0 

AUD1LCH 

Pointer to the audio data 

Bits 16-20 

$0B2 

AUD1LCL 

for channel 1

Bits 0-15 

$0C0 

AUD2LCH 

Pointer to the audio data 

Bits 16-20 

$0C2 

AUD2LCL 

for channel 2

Bits 0-15 

$0D0 

AUD3LCH 

Pointer to the audio data 

Bits 16-20 

$0D2 

AUD3LCL 

for channel 3

Bits 0-15 

The initialization of these address pointers can be accomplished with a
MOVE.L command: 

LEA $DFF000, A5 

MOVE.L #Start, AUDOLCH (A5) 

Base address of custom chips to A5 

Write "Start" in AUD0LC 

Next, the DMA controller must be told the length of the digitized cycle 

(i.e., how many samples it comprises). The appropriate registers are the 

AUDxLEN registers: 

re9-

Name 

Function 

$0A4 

AUD0LEN 

Number of audio data words for channel 0 

$0B4 

AUD1LEN 

Number of audio data words for channel 1 

$0C4 

AUD2LEN 

Number of audio data words for channel 2 

$0D4 

AUD3LEN 

Number of audio data words for channel 3 

The length is specified in words, not bytes. The number of bytes must be divided by two before being written to the AUDxLEN register. The AUDxLEN register can be initialized with the following MOVE command. To avoid having to count all the words, two labels are defined:
"Start" is the starting address of the data list, "End" the end address+1 

(see the previous example data list). The base address of the custom chips 

($DFF00O) is stored in A5: 

MOVE.W # (End-Start) /2, AUD0LEN(A5) 

Now comes the volume of the sound. On the Amiga the volume for each channel can be set separately. A  total of 65 levels are available, ranging from 0  (inaudible) to 64 (full volume). The corresponding registers are called AUDxVOL:

Reg. 

Name 

Function 

fOA8~
$0B8 

$0C8 

$0D8 

AUDOVOL 

AUDI VOL 

AUD2VOL 

AUD3VOL 

Volume of audio channel 0 

Volume of audio channel 1 

Volume of audio channel 2 

Volume of audio channel 3 

Let's set our audio channel to half volume: 

MOVE.W #32, AUD0VOL(A5) 

The last parameter is the sampling rate. This determines how often a  data byte (sample) is sent to the digital/analog converter. The sampling rate determines the frequency of the sound. As explained initially, the frequency equals the number of oscillations (cycles) per second. An oscillation consists of an arbitrary number of samples. In our example it is
16. If the sampling rate represents the number of samples read per second, 

the frequency of the sound corresponds to the sampling rate divided by the number of samples per'cycle:

Frequency = 

Sampling rate 

Samples per cycle 

Unfortunately the sampling rate cannot be specified directly in Hertz. 

Instead, the DMA controller wants to know the number of bus cycles 

desired between the output of two samples. A  bus cycle takes exactly

## 279.365 nanoseconds (billionths of a  second) or 2.79365 *  10-7

seconds. To get from the sampling rate to the number of bus cycles, first take the inverse of the sampling rate. This gives you the duration of the sample.
Dividing this value by the duration of a  bus cycle in seconds yields the 

number of bus cycles between two samples, called the sample period:

Sample period = 

Sampling rate *  2.79365 *  10-7 

Let's assume that we want to play our sample tone with a  frequency of 

440 Hz, the standard A. The sampling rate is computed as follows: 

Sampling rate =  Frequency *  Samples per cycle 

Sampling rate =  440 Hz *  1 6 =  7040 Hz 

We quickly obtain the required sample period by inserting the 

appropriate values:

Sample period = 

= 508.4583 

7040*2.79365*10-7 

Since only integral values can be specified for the sample period, we round the result to 508. As a  result, the output frequency is not exactly
440 Hz, but the deviation is minimal, namely 0.4 Hz. 

The sample period can theoretically be anything between 0  and 65535. However, the actual range has an upper limit. As can be gathered from the figure in the "Fundamentals" section, each audio channel has one
DMA slot per raster line (i.e., one data word (two samples) can be read 

from memory in each raster line). The smallest possible value for the sample period is 124. The sample frequency for this value is 28867 Hz. If the sample period is made shorter than 124, a  data word can be output twice because the next one cannot be read in time. The sample period registers are called AUDxPER:

Reg. 

Name 

|0A6 

$0B6 

$0C6 

$0D6 

Function 

AUD0PER 

AUDI PER 

AUD2PER 

AUD3PER 

Sample period for audio channel 0 

Sample period for audio channel 1 

Sample period for audio channel 2 

Sample period for audio channel 3 

MOVE.W #508,AUD0PER(A5) puts the sampling rate we calculated into 

the AUD0PER register. Now all the registers for audio channel 0  have been supplied with the proper values for our sound. To make it audible, we still have to enable the DMA access for audio channel 0. Four bits in the DMACON register are responsible for the audio DMA channels:

DMACON bit no. Name 

Audio DMA channel no. 

AUD3EN 

AUD2EN 

AUDI EN 

AUDOEN 

To enable the audio DMA for channel 0, we set the AUDOEN bit to 1. To be on the safe side, the DMAEN bit should be set along with it (see
"Fundamentals"): 

MOVE.W #$8201, DMACON(A5) 

Set AUDOEN and DMAEN 

Now the DMA starts to fetch the audio data from memory and output it through the digital/analog converter. The sound can be heard through the speaker. To turn it off again, simply set AUDOEN =  0. Whenever AUDxEN is set to 1, the DMA starts at the address in
AUDxLC. There is one exception: If the DMA channel was on 

(AUDxEN =  1) and the bit is briefly cleared and then set back to 1 

without the DMA channel reading a  new data word in the meantime, the
DMA controller continues with the old address. 

Audio interrupts 

The audio DMA always starts with the data byte at the address in
AUDxLC. Once the number of data words specified in AUDxLEN have 

been read from memory and output, the DMA starts over at the AUDxLC address. In contrast to the address registers for the Blitter or the bit-planes, the content of the AUDxLC register is not changed during the audio DMA. There is an additional address register for each audio channel. Before the DMA controller gets the first data byte from memory, it copies the value from the AUDxLC register to this internal address register. It also transfers the AUDxLEN register value into an internal counter. When this happens, an interrupt is generated. As you may recall from the section on interrupts, there is a  separate interrupt bit for each of the four audio channels. The level 4  processor interrupt is reserved exclusively for these bits. While the DMA controller now reads data words from memory, the processor can supply AUDxLC and AUDxLEN with new data, since the values of both registers are stored internally. Not until the counter that was initially loaded with the value from AUDxLEN reaches 0  will the data from AUDxLC and AUDxLEN be read again. The processor then has enough time to change the values of the two registers, if necessary. This allows uninterrupted sound output. An interrupt is generated after each complete cycle. This means that for high frequency sounds interrupts occur very often. The interrupt enable bits (INTEN) for the audio interrupts should be set only when they are actually needed, or the processor may not be able to save itself from all the interrupt requests.

Modulation of volume and frequency 

To create certain sound effects, it is possible to modulate the frequency and/or volume. One of the DMA channels acts as a  modulator which changes the corresponding parameters of another channel. This can be done very simply: The modulation oscillator fetches its data from memory as usual, but instead of sending it to the digital/analog converter, it writes it to the volume or frequency register of the oscillator that it modulates
(AUDxVOL or AUDxLEN). It can also affect both registers at once. In 

this case the data words read from its data list are written alternately to the AUDxVOL and AUDxLEN registers. The data words have the same format as their destination registers:

Volume: 

Frequency: 

Bits 7-15 Unused 

Bits 0-6 Volume value between 0  and 64 

Bits 0-15 Sample period  

The following shows the use of data words of the modulation oscillator for all three possible cases:

Data word 

No. 

Oscillator modulates: 

Frequency 

Volume Frequency &  volume 

Period 1 

Period 2 

Period 3 

Period 4 

Volume 1 

Volume 2 

Volume 3 

Volume 4 

Volume 1 

Period 1 

Volume 2 

Period 2 

To activate an audio channel as a  modulator, you must set the corresponding bit or bits in the audio disk control register (ADKCON). Each channel can modulate only its successor: channel 0  modulates channel 1, channel 1  modulates channel 2, and channel 2  modulates channel 3. Channel 3  can also be set as a  modulator, but its data words are not used to modulate another channel and are lost. If an audio channel is used as a  modulator, its audio output is disabled. The ADKCON register contains, as its name suggests, control bits for the disk controller in addition to the audio circuitry. The disk controller bits are explained in more detail in another section.

ADKCON register $09E (write) $010 (read) 

Bit no. 

Name 

Function 

14-8 

SET/CLR 

USE3PN 

USE2P3 

USE1P2 

USE0P1 

USE3VN 

Bits are set (SET/CLR=1) or cleared 

Used by the disk controller 

Audio channel 3  modulates nothing 

Audio channel 2  modulates period of channel 3 

Audio channel 1  modulates period of channel 2 

Audio channel 0  modulates period of channel 1 

Audio channel 3  modulates nothing 

USE2V3 

Audio channel 2  modulates volume of channel 3 

USE1V2 

Audio channel 1  modulates volume of channel 2 

USE0V1 

Audio channel 0  modulates volume of channel 1 

To recap: If a  channel is used for modulation, its data words are simply written into the corresponding register of the modulated channel. In other respects the two operate completely independently of each other.

Problems of digital sound generation on the Amiga 

In our example we defined a  cycle with 16 samples. The maximum sampling rate is 28867 Hz. This yields a  maximum frequency of 28867 /
16 =  1460.4 Hz. This is close to a  third-octave F  sharp (1480 Hz). 

If you want to go higher, you must decrease the number of samples per cycle. If we define our sine with half the samples, the maximum frequency increases to 3020.8 Hz. However, eight data bytes aren't enough for a  good sine wave. For yet higher pitches, the number of samples decreases even more. For 6041.6 Hz there are only four.
Waveforms can barely be recognized with just four samples. 

Digitizing multiple waves for improving 

tone quality

S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 

S =  sample 

Cycles 

However, this isn't very noticeable when heard. The ear reacts practically the same. The higher the frequency, the more difficult it is to identify sounds. Despite this, it can improve the sound quality to use multiple cycles to define the desired waveform at high frequencies. The maximum frequency of the Amiga sound output is limited by another factor. When converting the digital sound data back to analog, two undesired interference frequencies occur due to interactions between the sampling rate and the desired sound frequency. One of these is the sum of the sampling rate and frequency and the other is their difference. This phenomenon is called "aliasing distortion. For example, with a  3 kHz sound and a  12 kHz sampling rate, the difference is 9  kHz and the sum 15 kHz.

Volume (db) 

0- 

Low-pass filter 

Frequency drop 

-30 

tt+

HH 

123456789 10111213141516171819 

Frequency (kHz) 

Volume (db) 

A A

Tom 

freq

-30 

Aliasing distortion 

Sampling rate 

Diffe\ence 

lency

Sum 

I I  I I  l/j I  I I  I I  i I  I I  I I  I I' 

12 3    4 

Audible aliasing distortion 

6 7   8 9  10111213141516171819 

Frequency (kHz) 

The low-pass filter In order to eliminate the alias frequencies, a  device called a  low-pass filter has been placed between the output of the digital/analog converter and the audio connectors. All frequencies up to 4  kHz pass through undisturbed. Between 4  and 7  kHz the signal is weakened, until above 7 kHz nothing is allowed to pass. For example, the 3  kHz tone is not affected by the low-pass filter, but both the sum and the difference frequencies of 9  and 15 kHz lie above the filter's cut-off frequency of 7 kHz and cannot pass through. Also, they are not heard through the speaker. If you try to output the same 3  kHz tone with a  sampling rate of
9 kHz, the difference frequency of 6  kHz (9 kHz -  3 kHz) is diminished 

by the filter but still passes through it. To be sure that the difference frequency always lies above the cut-off frequency of the filter, we must observe the following rule:

Sampling rate >  highest frequency component +  7 kHz 

It is not enough to ensure that the difference between the sampling frequency and the desired output frequency is greater than 7  kHz. If a waveform with many harmonics is used, each of the harmonics produces its own difference frequency with the sampling rate. This is why the highest frequency of the waveform must be used in the previous expression.

Not only does the low-pass filter hold back the aliasing distortion, it also 

limits the frequency range of the Amiga. To be sure, tones with a fundamental frequency between 4  and 7  kHz rarely occur in a  musical piece, but the harmonics of much lower fundamentals for certain waveforms lie within this range. This is especially clear for a  square wave. The square waveform, as we saw earlier, consists of the combination of several sine waves having a  set frequency relationship to each other. In the figure the square wave is shown to consist of just two harmonics and the fundamental tone. However, an actual square wave has an infinite number of harmonics. If the higher-order harmonics are limited or removed by the filter, a  somewhat deformed square wave results. In the extreme case where the fundamental frequency of the square wave approaches the cut-off frequency of the filter, only the fundamental remains. This turns the original square wave into a  sine wave.

Amplitude envelope of a  sound 

In addition to the waveform, the sound of an instrument is also influenced by its amplitude envelope. The Amiga can do almost anything in the area of waveforms. How are specific envelopes programmed? The envelope of a  sound can be divided into three sections: The attack, sustain, and decay phases. As soon as the sound is played, the attack phase begins. It determines how quickly the volume rises from zero to the sustain value. During the sustain phase the sound remains at this volume. As the sound ends, it enters the decay phase, where the volume drops from the sustain value back to zero. The amplitude curve that this process represents is generally called an envelope. How do you program such an envelope on the Amiga? There are three possibilities:

Volume modulation 

A second sound channel is used to modulate the volume of the sound. For example, channel 0  can be used to modulate channel 1. Channel 1 can continually output the desired sound with its volume set to 0. The desired amplitude curve is divided into two parts: attack phase and decay phase. It is digitized (just like a  waveform) and placed in memory in two data lists. When the sound is to be played, channel 0  is set to the address of the attack data and started. Since it modulates the volume of channel 1, the volume of the sound follows the desired attack phase exactly. When the attack phase reaches the sustain value, the data list for channel 0  has been processed. It then generates an interrupt, and the data list would normally be processed again from the beginning. The processor must react to the interrupt and turn off channel 0  by means of the AUDOEN bit in the DMACON register. Channel 1  remains at the desired sustain volume. When the tone is to be turned off, you set channel 0  to the start of the decay data and start it again. Wait again for the interrupt, which signals that the decay phase is done, and turn channel 0  off. The registers for channel 0  must be initialized as follows for this procedure:

USE0V1 This bit in the ADKCON register should be set to 1  so 

that channel 0  modulates the volume of channel 1.

AUDOLC First set to the data list for the attack phase and then to 

that of the decay phase.

AUDOLEN Contains, depending on the address in AUDOLC, the 

length of either the attack or decay data.

AUDOVOL Has no function here, since the audio output of channel 

0 is turned off. 

AUDOPER The content of the AUDOPER register determines the 

speed at which the volume data is read from memory. This can be used to set the length of the attack/decay phase. This method allows the desired envelope to be constructed perfectly.
Unfortunately, it also has a  big disadvantage: Two audio channels are 

required for one sound. If you want four different sound channels, you have to use an alternate method:

Controlling volume with the processor 

The desired envelope is placed in memory as previously described. However, this time the processor changes the volume. It fetches the current volume from memory at regular intervals and writes it to the volume register of the corresponding sound channel. The program must be run as an interrupt routine. This can be done in the vertical blanking interrupt or one of the timer interrupts from CIA-B can be used. The disadvantage of this method is the amount of processor time that it requires, since the volume control is not performed by DMA. Since the amount of time needed is reasonably limited, this is usually the best method for most applications.

Constructing the envelope in the sample data 

This method is best for short sounds or sound effects. Instead of digitizing just one cycle of the desired waveform, write the entire sound into memory. A  program can calculate it, or you can use an audio digitizer, which performs hardware digitizing of sound with a microphone and analog/digital converter.

Several companies offer such devices for use with the Amiga. Once the 

data is in the Amiga, it can be played back at any pitch or speed. This allows complex effects, such as laughter or screams, to be reproduced by the Amiga with considerable accuracy. This method also has its disadvantages: It involves either difficult calculations or additional hardware to put the complete sound in digitized form into memory. In addition, this method requires large amounts of memory. For example, if the sound is 1  second long with a sampling rate of 20 kHz, the sound data takes up 20K.

Tips, tricks and more 

Sound quality 

The value range of the digital data is from -128 to 127. This range should be used as fully as possible. It is best when the amplitude of the digital waveform equals 256.

Otherwise the sound quality deteriorates audibly, since a  decrease in the 

range means relatively greater quantization error and noise that can quickly reach distortional proportions. For this reason you should avoid using the amplitude of the digitized sound to control the volume. Each channel has its own AUDxVOL register for volume control. If the volume is reduced with this register, the relationship between the desired sound and the distortion remains the same and the Amiga's high sound quality is preserved.

Changing waveforms smoothly 

To avoid annoying crackling or jumps in volume when changing waveforms, remember the following rules: Each cycle should be digitized from zero-point to zero-point (i.e., it should start and end at a  point where the waveform crosses the X  axis). If you follow this rule, all waveforms in memory have the same starting and ending value, namely zero. In transitions between consecutive waveforms of different shapes, there are no sudden level jumps which would be heard as noise.

Secondly, you should make sure that the total volumes of the two cycles 

are approximately equal. Volume refers to the effective value of the waveform. The effective value is equal to the amplitude of a  square wave signal whose surface under the curve is exactly as large as that of the waveform. This effective value determines the volume of an oscillation. Only for a square wave does it equal the amplitude. If you change from one waveform to another with a  higher effective value, the second sounds louder than its predecessor. The effective value of a  cycle can be easily calculated from its digitized data:

You add up the values of all the data bytes and divide the result by the 

number of data bytes. If you want to fully utilize the 8-bit value range of the digital/analog converter for all waveforms, the effective values will not always match. The volume must be adjusted accordingly with the AUDxVOL register when changing waveforms.

Playing notes 

Normally a  piece of music is written out in the form of notes. If you want 

to play it on the Amiga, you must convert the notes to the appropriate sample periods. To minimize the amount of calculation, it is generally best to use a  table containing the sample period values for all the half-tones in an octave:

Table of sample period values for musical notes (for AUDxLEN =  16): 

Note Frequency [Hz] 

Sample period 

c

261.7 

c#

277.2 

D 

293.7 

D# 

311.2 

E 

329.7 

F 

349.3 

F# 

370.0 

G 

392.0 

G# 

415.3 

A 

440.0 

A# 

466.2 

B 

493.9 

C 

523.3 

(262.0) 

(276.9) 

(293.6) 

(311.6) 

(330.0) 

(349.6) 

(370.4) 

(392.5) 

(415.8) 

(440.4) 

(466.0) 

(495.0) 

(522.7) 

A value in parentheses represents the actual frequency for the corresponding sampling period. The frequency of a  half-tone is always greater than its predecessor by the factor "twelfth root of 2." Thus 440
(A) *  2(1/12) =  466.2 (A#), 466.2 (A#) *  2(1/12) =  493.9 (B), etc. 

An octave always corresponds to a  doubling of frequency. If you want to play a  note from an octave that is not in the table, there are two options:

1. Change the sampling period. For each octave up the value must be 

halved. An octave lower means doubling the sampling period. This is simple, but one soon runs into certain limits. With a  data field of
32 bytes (AUDxLEN =  16), as in our table, the smallest possible 

sampling period (124) is reached with the second A. The data list must be reduced in size. In this case you get problems with lower tones since the aliasing distortion then becomes audible. A better solution is procedure 2:

2. Create a  separate data list for each octave. The sampling period 

value remains the same for every octave. It is used only to select the half-tone. If a  tone from an octave above that in the table is required, you use a  data list that is only half as long.
Correspondingly, a  list twice as long is used for the next lower 

octave. The normal musical range comprises eight octaves, meaning that you need eight data lists per waveform. In return for the extra work this method involves, you always get the optimal sound regardless of pitch.

Creating higher frequencies 

The minimal sampling period is normally 124. The reason for this is that the audio DMA is not able to read the data words fast enough to support a shorter sampling period. The old data word is then output more than once. This effect can be used to our advantage. Since the data word read contains two samples, a  high frequency square wave can be created with it. With a  sampling period of 1  you get a  sampling frequency of 3.58
MHz and an output frequency of 1.74 MHz. To be able to use this high 

frequency output signal, you must intercept it before it reaches the low- pass filter. The AUDIN input (pin 16) of the serial connector (RS232) allows you to do this. It is connected directly to the right audio output of
Paula (see the section on interfaces). 

In order to create such high frequencies, AUDxVOL must be set to the maximum volume (AUDxVOL =  64).

Playing polyphonic music 

Since the Amiga has four independent audio channels, four different sounds can be created at once. This allows any four-voice musical pieces to be played directly. But there can be more. Just because there are four audio channels doesn't mean that four voices is the maximum. As we mentioned, each waveform is actually a  combination of sine signals. Just as these harmonics together make up the waveform, you can also combine multiple waveforms into a  multi-voiced sound. The output signals for audio channels 0  and 3  are mixed together into one stereo channel inside
Paula. The waveforms of both channels are combined into a  single two- 

voiced channel. The same thing that's done electronically with analog signals can be done by computation with digital data. Simply add the digital data of two completely different waveforms and output the new data to the audio channel as usual. Now you have two voices per audio channel. Theoretically, any number of voices can be played over a  sound channel in this manner. In practice the number of voices is limited by the speed of computation, but 16 voices are certainly possible.

Calculating the summed signal from the components is very simple. At 

each point in time the current values of all the sounds are added and the result is divided by the number of voices. This is how a  square signal results from combining sine waves with the right relative frequencies.

Audio output without DMA 

Like all DMA channels, the audio DMA channels have registers to which 

they write data and where data can also be written by the processor: The audio data registers

Reg. 

Name 

Function 

$0AA~ 

$0BA 

$0CA 

$0DA 

AUDODAT 

AUDI DAT 

AUD2DAT 

AUD3DAT 

These four registers always contain the current audio data word, consisting of two samples. The sample in the upper byte (bits 8-15) is always output first. For the processor to be able to write to the audio data registers, the DMA must be turned off with AUDxEN =  0. This also changes the creation of audio interrupts. They will now always occur after the output of the two samples in the AUDxDAT register instead of at the start of each audio data list. If a  new data word is not loaded into AUDxDAT in time, the last two samples are not repeated as they are for DMA operation, but the output remains at the value of the last data byte (the lower half of the word in
AUDxDAT). 

The direct programming of the audio data registers costs a  great deal of processing time. The audio DMA should be used except in special cases. A few facts

AUDxVOL values in deciBels (0 dB =  full volume): 

AUDxVOL 

dB

AUDxVOL 

dB

AUDxVOL 

dB

AUDxVOL 

dB

0.0 

-2.5 

-6.0 

-12.0 

-0.1 

-2.7 

-6.3 

-12.6 

-0.3 

-2.9 

-6.6 

-13.2 

-0.4 

-3.1 

-6.9 

-13.8 

-0.6 

-3.3 

-7.2 

-14.5 

-0.7 

-3.5 

-7.5 

-15.3 

-0.9 

-3.7 

-7.8 

-16.1 

-1.0 

-3.9 

-8.2 

-17.0 

-1.2 

-4.1 

-8.5 

-18.1 

-1.3 

-4.3 

-8.9 

-19.2 

-1.5 

-4.5 

-9.3 

-20.6 

-1.6 

-4.8 

-9.7 

-22.1 

-1.8 

-5.0 

-10.1 

-24.1 

-2.0 

-5.2 

-10.5 

-26.6 

-2.1 

-5.5 

-11.0 

-30.1 

-2.3 

-5.8 

-11.5 

-36.1 

AUDxVOL =  0 corresponds to a  dB value of minus infinity. If AUDxVOL 

= 64, then a  digital value of 127 corresponds to an output voltage of 

about 400 millivolts, and -128 corresponds to -400 millivolts. A  change of 1  LSB causes about a  3 millivolt variation in the output voltage.

Example programs 

Program 1: Creating a  simple sine wave 

This program creates a  sine wave tone with a  frequency of 440 Hz. The sample table presented in the text is used. The largest portion of the program is used to allocate chip RAM for the audio data list. The sound is produced over channel 0  until the mouse button is pressed. The program then releases the occupied memory.

.*** create a  simple sinewave *** 

 Custom chip registers 

intena =  $9A  Interrupt enable register (write) dmacon =  $96 /DMA control register (write)

 Audio-Register 

audOlc =  $A0 Address of audio data list audOlen =  $A4 /Length of audio data list audOper =  $A6 /Sampling period audOvol =  $A8 /Volume adkcon =  $9E /Control register for modulation

/CIA-A Port register A  (mouse button) 

ciaapra =  $bfe001 

/Exec Library Base Offsets 

AllocMem =  -30-168 /ByteSize,Requirements/dO,dl

FreeMem =  -30-180 /MemoryBlock, ByteSize/al,d0 

/Other labels 

ALsize =  ALend -  ALstart /Length of audio data list 

Execbase =  4 

chip =  2 /Allocate chip RAM

/*** Initialization *** 

start :

/Allocate memory for audio data list 

move . 1 Execbase , a6 moveq #ALsize,dO /Size of audio data list moveq #chip, dl jsr AllocMem(a6) /Allocate memory beq

Ende 

.•Error -> End program 

Copy audio data list in chip RAM 

move.l dO,aO  Address in chip RAM move.l #ALstart,al ,-Address in program moveq #ALsize-l,dl Loop counter

Loop: move.b (al)+,(aO)+ Data list in chip RAM 

dbf dl,Loop

*** Main program 

 Initialize audio registers 

lea $DFF000,a5 

move.w #$000f ,dmacon(a5) Audio DMA off 

move.l d0,aud01c(a5) Set address of data list move.w #ALsize/2,aud01en(a5) Length in words move.w #32,aud0vol(a5) Half volume move.w #508,aud0per (a5)  Frequency: 440 Hz
move.w #$00ff ,adkcon(a5) .-Disable modulation 

.•Enable audio DMA 

move.w #$8201,dmacon(a5) .-Channel 0  on 

Wait for a  mouse button 

wait: btst #6,ciaapra bne wait

 Disable audio DMA 

move.w #$0001,dmacon(a5) /Channel 0  off 

*** End of program *** 

move.l d0,al ,-Address of data list moveq #ALsize,d0 Length jsr FreeMem(a6) ,-Release assigned memory

Ende: clr 

.1 dO 

rts

 Audio data list 

ALstart : 

dc.b

0,49 

dc.b

90,117 

dc.b

127,117 

dc.b

90,49 

dc.b

0,-49 

dc.b

-90,-117 

dc.b

-127,-117 

dc.b

-90,-49 

ALend: 

 Program end 

end

Program 2: Sine wave tone with vibrato 

This program is an extension of the previous one. The same sine wave tone is output, but this time over channel 1. Channel 0  modulates the frequency of channel 1  and creates the vibrato effect. The data for the vibrato represents a  digitized sine wave whose zero point has the value of the sampling period of a  standard A  (i.e., 508).

*** Creating a  vibrato *** 

/Custom chip register 

INTENA =  $9A /Interrupt enable register (write) 

DMACON =  $9 6  DMA control register (write) 

Audio registers 

AUDOLC =  $A0 Address of audio data list 

AUDOLEN =  $A4 .-Length of audio data list 

AUDOPER =  $A6  Sampling period 

AUDOVOL =  $A8  Volume 

AUD1LC =  $B0 

AUD1LEN =  $B4 

AUD1PER =  $B6 

AUD1VOL =  $B8 

ADKCON =  $9E /Control register for modulation 

CIA-A Port register A  (mouse button) 

CIAAPRA =  $bfe001 

Exec Library Base Offsets 

AllocMem =  -30-168 ByteSize, Requirements /d0,dl
FreeMem =  -30-180 MemoryBlock,ByteSize/al,dO 

/Other labels 

Execbase =  4 

chip =  2 /Allocate chip RAM

Vibsize =  Vibend -  Vibstart /Length of vibrato table 

ALsize =  ALend -  ALstart Length of audio data list 

Size =  ALsize +  Vibsize Total length of both lists 

*** Initialization *** 

start : Allocate memory for data lists move . 1 Execbase , a 6 move.l #Size,dO Length of both lists moveq #chip,dl jsr AllocMem(a6) /Allocate memory beq Ende

Copy audio data list in chip RAM 

move.l dO,aO  Address in chip RAM move.l #ALstart,al Address in program move.l #Size-l,dl Loop counter

Loop: move.b (al) +  ,(aO)+ .-Lists in chip RAM 

dbf dl , Loop

*** Main program 

 Initialize audio registers 

move.l dO,dl  Audio data list address add.l #ALsize,dl .-Address of vibrato table

lea $DFF000,a5 

move.w #$000f ,dmacon(a5) ,-Audio DMA off 

move.l dl,aud01c(a5) Set to vibrato table move.w #Vibsize,aud01en(a5) ,-Length of vibrato table move.w #8961,aud0per(a5) Vibrato frequency move.l d0,audllc(a5)  Channel 1  from audio data list move.w #ALsize,audllen(a5) ,-Length of audio data list move.w #32,audlvol(a5) ,-Half volume

move.w #$00FF,adkcon(a5) ,-Disable other modulation 

move.w #$8010,adkcon(a5) ,-Channel 0  modulates period from 

channel 1

 Audio DMA on 

move.w #$8203,dmacon(a5) .-Channels 0  and 1  on 

Wait for a  mouse button 

wait: btst #6,ciaapra bne wait

 Audio DMA off 

move.w #$0003,dmacon(a5) Channels 0  and 1  off 

,-*** End program *** 

move .1 dO , al move.l #Size,dO jsr FreeMem(a6)

Ende: clr.l dO 

rts

 Audio data list 

 Address of lists 

 Length 

 Release memory 

ALstart : 

dc.b

0,49 

dc.b

90,117 

dc.b

127,117 

dc.b

90,49 

dc.b

0,-49 

dc.b

-90,-117 

dc.b

-127,-117 

dc.b

-90,-49 

ALend: 

 Vibrato 

table

Vibstart : 

dew 508, 513 ,  518, 522, 524, 525, 524, 522, 518, 513 dew 508,503,498,494,492,491,492,494,498,503
Vibend : 

 Program end 

end
