# The Copper Coprocessor

*From "Amiga Intern" (1992) by Kuhnert, Maelger, Schemmel. Abacus.*

### 11.7.4 The Copper Coprocessor

The Copper is a  simple coprocessor. It writes certain values into the various registers of the custom chips automatically at defined points in time. More accurately, the Copper can change the contents of some registers at any screen position. By doing so, it can divide the screen into different regions, which can then have different colors and resolutions. For example, this capability is used to implement multiple screens. The Copper is designated a  coprocessor because, like a  real processor, it has a  program stored in memory that executes command by command. The Copper recognizes only three different commands, but they are quite versatile:

MOVE 

The MOVE command writes an immediate value into a  custom chip register.

WAIT 

The WAIT command waits until the electron beam reaches a  certain screen position.

SKIP 

The SKIP command skips the next command if the electron beam has already reached a  certain screen position. This allows conditional branches to be built into the program. A Copper program is called a  Copper list. It is a  series of consecutive instructions, each consisting of two words. For example:

Wait (XI, Yl) waits until screen position XI, Yl is reached 

Move #0,$180 writes the value 0  to the background color register 

Move #9, $181 ,-writes the value 1  to color register 1 

Wait (X2,Y2) waits until screen position X2,Y2 is reached 

... etc. 

The Copper list alone is not sufficient to operate the Copper. Other registers are required which contain parameters needed by the Copper. The Copper register

Reg. 

Name 

Function 

$080 

COP1LCH 

These two registers together contain the

$082 

COP1LCL 

20-bit address of the first Copper list. 

$084 

COP2LCH 

These two registers together contain the

$086 

COP2LCL 

20-bit address of the second Copper list. 

$088 

COPJMP1 

Loads the address of the first Copper list into 

the Copper program counter.

$08A 

COPJMP2 

Loads the address of the second Copper list 

into the Copper program counter.

$02E 

COPCON 

This register contains only a  single bit (bit 0). If it is set, the Copper can also access the registers from
$040 to $7E. (These belong to the Blitter.) 

All the Copper registers are write-only registers. The COPxLC registers contain addresses of Copper lists. Since such an address is 19 bits long, two registers are needed per address. Both registers of a  pair can be written with one MOVE.L command to the first register. The Copper lists, like all other data for the custom chips, must lie within the 2  Meg chip RAM. The Copper uses an internal counter as a  pointer to the current command. It is incremented by two each time a  command is processed. To start the Copper at a  given address, the start address of the Copper list must be transferred to the program counter. The COPJMPx registers are used for this. They are strobe registers, meaning that a  write access to one of them simply activates a  particular action —  they are not used to store actual values. The values written to them are completely irrelevant. In the Copper these two registers cause the contents of the corresponding COPxLC registers to be copied into the program counter. If a  write access is made to COPJMP1, the address in COP1LC is copied into the program counter, which causes the Copper to execute the program at that address. This also applies to COPJMP2 and COP2LC. At the start of the vertical blanking gap, line 0, the program counter is automatically loaded with the value from COP1LC. This causes the
Copper to execute the same program for every picture. 

The command structure

MOVE 

WAIT 

SKIP 

Bit 

BW1 

BW2 

BW1 

BW2 

BW1 

BW2 

DW15 

VP7 

BFD 

VP7 

BFD 

DW14 

VP6 

VM6 

VP6 

VM6 

DW13 

VP5 

VM5 

VP5 

VM5 

DW12 

VP4 

VM4 

VP4 

VM4 

DW11 

VP3 

VM3 

VP3 

VM3 

DW10 

VP2 

VM2 

VP2 

VM2 

DW9 

VP1 

VM1 

VP1 

VM1 

RA8 

DW8 

VPO 

VMO 

VPO 

VMO 

RA7 

DW7 

HP8 

HM8 

HP8 

HM8 

RA6 

DW6 

HP7 

HM7 

HP7 

HM7 

RA5 

DW5 

HP6 

HM6 

HP6 

HM6 

RA4 

DW4 

HP5 

HM5 

HP5 

HM5 

RA3 

DW3 

HP4 

HM4 

HP4 

HM4 

RA2 

DW2 

HP3 

HM3 

HP3 

HM3 

RA1 

DW1 

HP2 

HM2 

HP2 

HM2 

DWO 

Legend: 

x This bit is unused. It should be initialized to 0.

RA Register address 

DW Data word 

VP Vertical beam position 

VM Vertical mask bits 

HP Horizontal beam position 

HM Horizontal mask bits 

BFD Blitter finish disable 

The MOVE command The MOVE command is indicated by a  0 in bit 0  of the first command word. With this command it is possible to write an immediate value to a custom chip register. The register address of the desired register comes from the lower 9  bits of the first data word. Bit 0  must always remain 0  (it is already 0  for the register addresses because the registers lie only on even addresses). The second command word contains the data byte to be written to the register. There are some limitations regarding the register address. Normally the
Blitter cannot affect the registers in the range from $000 to $07F. If the 

lowest (and only) bit in the COPCON register is set, then the Copper can write to the registers in the range from $040 to $07F. This allows the

Copper to use the Blitter. Access to the lowest registers ($000 to $03F) 

is never allowed. The WAIT command The WAIT command is indicated by a  1 in bit 0  of the first word and a  0 in bit 0  of the second word. It instructs the Copper to hold further execution until the desired beam position is reached. If the position is already greater than that specified by the WAIT command at the time the command is executed (the beam is already past the specified position), the Copper continues with the next instruction immediately. This position can be set separately for the vertical lines and horizontal rows. Vertically the resolution is one raster line. But since there are only eight bits for the vertical position and there are 313 lines, the WAIT command cannot distinguish between the first 256 and the remaining 57 lines. For example, the lowest eight bits are the same for both line 0  and line
256. To wait for a  line in the lower range, two wait commands must be 

used.

1. WAIT for line 255 column 224 ($FFE1 ). 

2. WAIT for the desired line, ignoring the ninth bit. 

Horizontally there are 112 possible positions, since the two lower bits of 

the horizontal position, HPO and HP1, cannot be specified. The command word of the WAIT command holds only bits HP2 to HP8. This means that the horizontal coordinate of a  WAIT command can only be specified in steps of four low-resolution pixels. The second command word contains mask bits. These can be used to determine which bits of the horizontal and vertical position are actually considered in the comparison with the current beam position. Only the position bits whose mask bits are set are considered. This opens up many possibilities. For example:

Wait for vertical position $0F and vertical mask $0F 

causes the WAIT condition to be fulfilled every 16 lines (whenever the lower four bits are all 1), since bits 4  to 6  are not considered (mask bits 4 to 6  are at 0). The seventh bit of the vertical position cannot be masked. The previous example works only in the range of lines 0  to 127 and 256 to 313. The BFD (Blitter Finish Disable) bit has the following function: If the
Copper is used to start a  Blitter operation, it must know when the Blitter 

is finished with the previous operation. If the BFD bit is cleared, the
Copper waits at every WAIT command until the Blitter has finished its 

operation. Only then is the WAIT condition checked. This can be prevented by setting the BFD bit, causing the Copper to ignore the current Blitter status. If the Copper shouldn't affect any of the Blitter registers, this bit is set to 1. The SKIP command The SKIP command is identical to the WAIT command, except that bit 0 in the second command word is set to distinguish it from the WAIT command. The SKIP command checks to see if the actual beam position is greater than or equal to that given in the command word. If this comparison is positive, the Copper skips the next command. Otherwise it continues program processing by executing the next command. The
SKIP command allows conditional branches to be constructed. The 

command following SKIP can be a  MOVE into one of the COPJMP registers, causing a  jump to be made based on the beam position. t

Construction of a  Copper list 

A simple Copper list consists of a  sequence of WAIT and MOVE commands, and a  few SKIP commands. Its start address is found in
COPLC1. A  trick must be used to end the Copper list. After the last 

instruction comes a  WAIT command with an impossible beam position. This effectively ends the processing of the Copper list until, at the start of a new picture, the COPLC1 address is loaded into the program counter again to restart processing. WAIT ($0,$FE) fulfills this condition, because a horizontal position greater than $E4 is not possible. The Copper interrupt As you know, there is a  special bit in the interrupt registers for the
Copper interrupt. This interrupt can be generated with a  MOVE 

command to the INTREQ register:

MOVE #$8010,INTREQ set SET/CLR and COPER 

Any other bit in this register can be affected the same way, but bit 4  is 

provided especially for the Copper. A Copper interrupt can be used to tell the processor that a  certain screen position has been reached. This allows what are called raster interrupts to be programmed (i.e., the interruption of the processor in a  certain screen line (and column)). The Copper DMA The Copper fetches its commands from memory through its own DMA channel. It uses the even bus cycles and has precedence over the Blitter and the 68030. Each command requires two cycles, since two command words must be read. The WAIT command requires an additional cycle when the desired beam position is reached. The Copper leaves the bus free during the wait phase of a  WAIT command. The COPEN bit in the DMACON register is used to turn the Copper
DMA on and off. If this bit is cleared, the Copper releases the bus and 

does not execute any more commands. If it is set, it starts its program execution at the address in its program counter. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to supply this with a  valid address before starting the Copper
DMA. A  Copper running in an unknown area of memory can crash the 

system. The usual initialization sequence for the Copper looks like this:

LEA $DFF000,A5 Base address of registers to A5 

MOVE.W #$0080,DMACON(A5) Copper DMA off 

MOVE.L #Copperlist,COPlLCH(A5) Set address of Copper list 

COPJMPl(A5) ,-Transfer this address to Copper program 

counter
MOVE.W #$8080,DMACON(A5) ,-enable Copper DMA 

Sample program 

Finally, here is a  sample program. It uses two WAIT commands and three 

MOVE commands to display black, red and yellow bars on the screen. It 

can be created with a  simple Copper list and offers a  good example.
Enter the program with a  standard assembler for the Amiga (such as 

AssemPro): 

,-*** Example for a  simple Copper list *** 

CustomChip-Register 

INTENA =  $9A 

DMACON =  $96 

COLOR00 =  $180 

 Copper-Register 

COP1LC =  $80 

COP2LC =  $84 

COPJMP1 =  $88 

COPJMP2 =  $8a 

Interrupt-Enable register (write) 

•DMA-Control register (write) 

 Color palette register 0 

Address of 1st Copper list 

/Address of 2nd Copper list 

Jump to Copper list 1 

Jump to Copper list 2 

CIA-A Port register A  (Mouse key) 

CIAAPRA =  $BFE001 

Exec Library Base Offsets 

OpenLibrary =  -30-522 

Forbid =  -30-102
Permit =  -30-108 

AllocMem =  -30-168
FreeMem =  -30-180 

graphics base

StartList =  38 

 Other Labels 

Execbase =  4 

Chip =  2  Request Chip-RAM 

*** Initialize program *** 

/Request memory for Copper list 

Start : 

move.l Execbase, a6 moveq #Clsize,d0 moveq #chip,dl jsr AllocMem(a6)

 LibName , Vers ion/al , dO 

 ByteSize, Requirements/dO , dl 

MemoryBlock, ByteSize/al, dO 

Set parameters for AllocMem 

ask for Chip-RAM
.•request memory 

move .1 dO , CLadr beq . s  Ende

Copy Copper list to CLadr 

lea CLstart.aO move . 1 CLadr , al moveq #CLsize-l,dO
CLcopy : 

move.b (a0)+, (al)+ dbf dO , CLcopy

*** Main program *** 

jsr forbid (a6)
lea $dff000,a5 

move.w #$03a0,dmacon(a5) 

move . 1 CLadr , copl lc ( a5 ) clr.w copjmpl(a5)

Turn on Copper-DMA 

move.w #$8280,dmacon(a5) 

Wait for left mouse key 

Wait: btst #6,ciaapra 

bne.s Wait

*** End program *** 

(•Reactivate old Copper list 

move . 1 #GRname , a 1 clr.l dO jsr 0penLibrary(a6) move .1 dO , a4 move.l StartList (a4) , copllc(a5) clr.w copjmpl(a5)

move.w #$83e0,dmacon(a5) 

jsr permit (a6)

Free memory of Copper list 

 Store address of RAM area 

 Error! -> End 

Set loop counter 

Copy Copper list byte by byte 

 Task-switching off 

Base address of registers to A5 

DMA off 

/Address of Copper list to C0P1LC 

Load address to Copper program counter 

Test bit 

Set? Then wait. 

Set parameters for OpenLibrary 

Open Graphics Library 

/Address of GraphicsBase to a4 

Load address of Startlist 

A11 necessary DMA channels on 

 Task-switching on 

move.l CLadr, a 1 moveq #CLsize,dO

Set parameters for FreeMem 

jsr FreeMem(a6)

Ende: 

clr.l dO rts

Free memory 

Clear error-flag 

End program 

Variables 

CLadr: del 0 

 Constants 

GRname: dc.b "graphics . library" , 0 

even align

 Copper-List 

CLstart : 

dew color00,$0000 

dew $780f,$fffe 

dew color00,$0f00 

dew $d70f,$fffe 

dew color00,$0fb0 

dew $ffff,$fffe 

CLend : 

 Background color black 

Wait for line 120 

 Switch to red 

Line 215 

Gold 

.•Impossible position: End Copper-List 

CLsize =  CLend -  CLstart 

End of program 

This program installs the Copper list and then waits until the left mouse button is pressed. Unfortunately, this isn't as easy as it sounds.

First, you need memory in which to store the Copper list. Like all data for 

the custom chips, it must be in the chip RAM. Since you can't be sure whether the program is actually in the chip RAM, it is necessary to copy the Copper list into the chip RAM. In a  multitasking operating system like that of the Amiga, you can't just write something into memory you must request the memory. This is done in the program with the AllocMem routine. This returns the address of the requested chip RAM in DO. The
Copper list is then copied into memory at this address. 

Next, the task switching is disabled by a  call to Forbid so that the Amiga 

processes only your program. This prevents your program from being disturbed by another.

Finally, the Copper is initialized and started. After this, the program tests 

for the left mouse button by reading the appropriate port bit of CIA-A. If the mouse button is pressed, the processor exits the wait loop. To get back to the old display, a  special Copper list is loaded into the
Copper and started. This Copper list is called the startup Copper list and 

it initializes the screen. Its address is found in the variable area for the part of the operating system responsible for the graphics functions. At the end, task switching is re-enabled with Permit and the occupied memory is released again with FreeMem. This program contains a  number of operating system functions, which you are probably not familiar with yet. Unfortunately, this cannot be avoided if you want to make the program work correctly. But it doesn't matter if you don't understand everything yet. We are discussing the
Copper in this section, and this part of the program should be 

understandable. In the later sections of this book you'll discover the secrets of the operating system and its routines. Enter this example and experiment with the Copper list. Change the WAIT command or add new ones. You can also experiment with a  SKIP command.

Copper list 

Address Command 

Copper active 

n MOVE #black, COLOR00 n+2 WAIT 0,100 n+6 MOVE #red,COLOR00 n=6 WAIT 0,190 n+8 MOVE #gold,COLOR00 n+10 WAIT 254,255

Line 

u y/////A

VBlack V 

—Red = 

Gold 

The Copper list

One more thing about the Copper list: The two WAIT commands contain 

$E as the horizontal position. This is the start of the horizontal blanking 

gap. This way the Copper performs the color switch outside the visible area. If 0  is used as the horizontal position, the color switching can be seen at the extreme right edge of the screen.
